# News Articles Batch 2

DO NOT REMOVE THE ###ARTICLE_START### MARKERS

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:901

In the future, during an identity check, you may no longer be asked for
your passport (however biometric it may be), but for your Facebook
identity card. This is the provocative bet made by Berlin artist Tobias
Leingruber by putting into circulation the first copies of these papers
likely to replace official administrative documents in the near future.
His FB Bureau, in the test phase, will issue on demand, starting this
week, a card bearing your identification number (ID) on the social
network, with your name in civilian life, your user name, gender, date
of entry on the network, and a QR code, a barcode that allows access to
your account. The project is inspired by a personal anecdote. As he was
crossing the Canadian border into the United States last summer, an
agent asked Tobias Leingruber jokingly: \"So, what\'s your name on
Facebook?\" Much less funny when the request comes from a Syrian
soldier. \"When you cross the Lebanese border into Syria, you can be
stopped by a soldier working for the secret police who asks to see your
passport and if you have a Facebook account,\" reports the Foundland
collective, which has looked into the role of the social network in the
uprising (Libération, February 25). There are now nearly 900,000
Facebook citizens in the world, all of whom have an ID. This makes the
leader in social networks the dominant identity system on the Web. Since
its creation eight years ago, it has brought order to the mess that was
the Web, gradually eradicating the anonymity that reigned in the World
Wild Web. As the artist points out, when you sign up for new services
today, it is common to use Facebook Connect, instead of creating a new
account. \"People have stopped ranting on blogs because they only allow
comments with your \'real name\', which is your Facebook identity.\"
While controversies continue to follow one another regarding new
biometric cards that are supposed to prevent identity theft and, above
all, facilitate online shopping, Leingruber believes that these
technologies are already obsolete, compared to Facebook\'s existing
structure. \"By controlling our \[online\] identities and coupling them
with our social data, it is not very difficult to imagine establishing
an ID that is valid throughout the world.\" A project that raises the
question of the stakes of an identity that would be controlled by a
company and no longer by a government. FB Bureau will be presented as
part of the Unlike Us event, organized by the Institute of Networked
Culture, in Amsterdam from March 8 to 10. Academics, artists, activists
and programmers will reflect on possible alternatives in the field of
social media, monopolized by large corporations that get rich by
commodifying social relations. Several projects for decentralized and
open source platforms aimed at giving back autonomy to users (including
Crabgrass, Secushare, Freedombox, etc.) will be presented. An exhibition
also brings together a series of critical and playful experiments and
prototypes, such as the Poking Machine, a prosthesis made up of a
mechanical finger that physically taps you each time you receive a
notification from your virtual friends. There are also various
extensions such as Faceleaks, which allows you to \"leak\" your friends
off Facebook and make their photos public anonymously on the FaceLeaks
site. Or the John Smith add-on for Chrome transforms each Facebook or
Google + user into John Smith, the most common name on these social
media. http://fbbureau.com http://networkcultures.org/unlikeart
networkcultures.org/wpmu/unlikeus

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:902

Senegal is among the leading countries in West Africa for telecom
infrastructure. But with an Internet penetration rate of just 16%, can
online information and social media make a difference in the
presidential election? The fixed line penetration rate is less than 3%.
It is 80% for mobile. A little over half of Internet connections are on
the 3G network. Six hundred and fifty thousand Senegalese are on
Facebook, the tenth highest in Africa with almost 5% of the total
population, but more than 70% of the online population, with an increase
of 85,000 people in the last six months. These figures come from Olivier
Sagna, founder of Osiris.sn (Observatory on information systems,
networks and information highways in Senegal). One of the very first
observatories of its kind, it is the most comprehensive source of
independent information on information technologies that I found during
my African journey. An innovation that is all the more remarkable since
it dates back to 1998 and is proving increasingly useful. A historian by
training and a documentalist, Mr. Sagna affirms that he is \"not at all
a computer scientist\". Accessible information In \"information
society\", the most important word is \"society\", he says. He wants to
be a \"sentinel\" of civil society for everything concerning information
and communication technologies. To better achieve this, he has bet on a
\"multi-stakeholder\" site with participation from the private and
public sectors, universities and the media. \"We are anything but
neutral. We are for free software, creative commons, open access,
volunteer work\... Instead of our computers being in the clouds, let\'s
put them in our savannahs. We have to build the infrastructure and
exercise a certain sovereignty over it.\" At a previous meeting in
Dakar, Mr. Sagna stressed that Senegal is doing better than its
neighbors \"thanks to a properly managed public operator\" and quality
human resources. Some are tempted to attribute a good deal of the credit
to Orange, which owns 42% of the capital of Sonatel, the main Senegalese
operator. But if the infrastructure is rather good, the colonial legacy
is quite negative in terms of innovation. The dynamism is less than in
countries under Anglo-Saxon influence. \"We inherited Colbertism, they
are more pragmatic,\" believes Mr. Sagna with a regret that I have seen
elsewhere. We must start from the fact that everything is forbidden. It
takes more time to set up.\" The February 26 election saw notable
progress. Absent online for the previous campaign, the significant
candidates have a website and a Facebook page. Some even have a blog and
post videos on YouTube. The best-known of the citizen initiatives is
Senegal 2012 (Sunu2012.sn), which has its own Facebook page. This is
useful for the diaspora and for young people who follow on their mobile
phones. Conclusion: the information accessible on the Internet plays an
\"important but not decisive\" role. Mr. Sagna believes that \"social
networks do not play a determining role in the mobilization of
Senegalese citizens. Messages are transmitted more by radio, private
television and mobile phones. On the other hand, they play an important
role in the supply of cheap information to the private press, which has
too few resources to reach people everywhere. \[This\] helps to relay
and amplify information that only a minority can access on the Net.\" An
alliance that we have already seen at work elsewhere.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:903

Fujitsu Conseil Canada, tasked by the Assembly with evaluating the
product to recommend, between free software and the Office Pro Plus 2010
suite, with a view to drafting a call for tenders, presents itself as
\"one of Microsoft\'s largest partners in the world\" and its employees
\"maintain close ties\" with the multinational software company, a
spokesperson for the company told Le Devoir yesterday. A proximity
denounced by defenders of free software whose products were excluded
from the call for tenders, in defiance of the rules of good and healthy
governance, they maintain, while once again demanding the pure and
simple cancellation of the call for tenders launched at the beginning of
the week. Presented Wednesday as an \"independent external firm\" by the
National Assembly to justify its decision to open its call for tenders
only to Microsoft products for the firm replacement of 600 office suites
and 600 others as options, Fujitsu Consulting Canada is in fact anything
but independent of the American multinational. \"It is a partner with
whom we have very close business relations,\" agreed Caroline Senay,
head of communications and marketing for this multinational consulting
and new technology company, in an interview yesterday. \"We develop
projects jointly with the people at Microsoft, with whom we often sit
around the same tables to find solutions to market problems together.\"
This \"alliance,\" presented in these terms on the Fujitsu Consulting
Canada website, also allows it \"to have access to privileged
information from Microsoft,\" admits Ms. Senay, for the accomplishment
of its mandates. Worse, Fujitsu \"often promotes\" the products of the
American multinational, \"but not exclusively,\" she adds. \"This does
not prevent us from helping a client move towards other technologies, if
they wish.\" For the Fédération québécoise des communautés et des
industries du libre (FQCIL), the hiring of this consulting firm by the
National Assembly \-- and its consequence, the publication of a call for
tenders favoring proprietary software from Microsoft at the expense of
solutions without user licenses that free software represents \-- is
simply \"shocking.\" \"When the Assembly mentions this study to justify
that it acted according to the rules of the art, it is demonstrating
incredible bad faith,\" indicated Cyrille Béraud, president of the
Federation. More advantageous On Wednesday, the National Assembly
defended itself in a press release from having launched a call for
tenders that discriminated against free software, citing among other
things the Fujitsu report, which, after evaluating \"free software
products,\" concluded that \"Microsoft products \[are\] greatly
advantageous in the case of replacing the office suite.\" However, the
public institution refuses to reveal the precise content of this
evaluation. Yesterday, the National Assembly reiterated the validity of
its decision and its call for tenders, even defending the work of the
consulting firm, \"which not only represents Microsoft, but also other
software publishers,\" summarized Jean-Philippe Laprise, spokesperson
for the institution. \"It is also a firm that has recognized expertise
in the field of technologies.\" The contract for the renewal of the
Assembly\'s office suites is valued between \$900,000 and \$1.2 million.
The call for tenders ends on February 28. Earlier this week, the
National Assembly\'s decision to favor Microsoft for the renewal of its
office software was strongly criticized by the free software industry,
which did not fail to highlight the inconsistency of the gesture in an
institution that, a few months earlier, voted for Law 133 on the
governance and management of information resources of public bodies and
government companies. The legislative text stipulates that the
government apparatus must in the future \"consider free software in the
same way as other software\" when updating its computer equipment, in
order to \"ensure the sustainability of the government\'s digital
heritage,\" we can read. It should be noted that the National Assembly
is not officially subject to this law, but like all laws targeting
public bodies, the institution nevertheless says it subscribes to it,
added Mr. Laprise. In 2010, the Superior Court of Quebec had also
declared illegal calls for tenders targeting and naming products
associated with a single company, such as Microsoft. Rendered in the
case opposing Savoir-faire Linux to the Régie des rentes du Québec
(RRQ), this judgment even demanded that in the future the public
administration take into account free software in its entire strategy
for renewing its computer software. On the rise in public
administrations around the world, free software, more flexible, less
expensive and often just as effective as its proprietary equivalents
under license, is increasingly popular. France, the United States and
Great Britain have succumbed to it to reduce, among other things, their
government expenses, but also to stimulate the sharing of information
produced through these applications. Since the formats of this software
are open, it facilitates the exchange of civic data between different
systems and free software, which proprietary applications do not always
allow. In Quebec, dozens of politicians, all political stripes united,
have spoken out in favour of these computer tools in recent months.
\"Political speeches on free software are ultimately very
hypocritical,\" says Mr. Béraud. \"Clearly, there is an inability of the
State to speak truthfully on this issue.\" A tragedy, according to him,
as Quebec prepares to reveal its intentions regarding digital
governance, in the wake of the Gautrin report, the broad outlines of
which were revealed yesterday by Le Devoir. \"We want to promote open
government,\" he adds. \"But there can be no open government without
free software.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:904

The Assembly defended itself yesterday from encouraging such
discrimination by repeating that its policy requires it to respect
\"free competition,\" Jean-Philippe Laprise, spokesperson for the
institution, told Le Devoir. \"We already use several free software
programs here. In the case of replacing office suites, in accordance
with Bill 133 \[Act respecting the governance and management of
information resources of public bodies\], we commissioned an independent
study which, after evaluating free software and Microsoft products,
concluded that the latter would be more advantageous, for reasons of
compatibility and integration.\" Based on this report, the Assembly
launched a call for tenders at the beginning of the week for the firm
purchase of 600 Office Pro Plus 2010 licenses from the American
multinational Microsoft, coupled with the purchase of 600 others as
options, for a total of 1,200 computer software programs. Call No.
370100474 ends on February 28. The contract is worth between \$900,000
and \$1.2 million. The Fédération québécoise des communautés et des
industries du livre (FQCIL) is not budging, however. By acting in this
way, the Assembly is sending a contradictory message, given that in its
chamber, during the study of Bill 133, elected officials "unanimously"
expressed the importance of taking into account "free software
solutions" in public procurement, the organization summarizes in a press
release. Yesterday, the President of the Treasury Board, Michelle
Courchesne, pointed out that the National Assembly is not subject to
this law and, despite this, "completed all the required steps" to issue
the call for tenders. Nevertheless, for MNA Éric Caire, representing the
Coalition avenir Québec, the Assembly's decision is simply
"disappointing," he told Le Devoir. \"It is not by locking ourselves
into a monopoly \[that of Microsoft\] that we will make savings,\" he
said. It has been demonstrated that free software allows us to make
savings. It is therefore a bad decision and it is the taxpayer who will
pay for it.\" The FQCIL also points out that, in June 2010, the Superior
Court of Quebec had described this type of call for tenders as illegal,
demanding that in the future public authorities take free software into
account when updating their computer equipment. Distinguished by its
open formats and flexibility, in contrast to the closed proprietary
software of multinationals that demand usage rights for each of their
software programs, free software is struggling to find its place in
public administration, even if, according to its defenders, it
stimulates a healthy democracy, based on open and free computing,
encourages economic dynamism and avoids waste. According to the lobby
group, the purchase of licenses for proprietary software is a source of
waste for the benefit of foreign multinationals, waste that corresponds
to \"the amounts of the \$200 health tax and the increase in tuition
fees required of young Quebecers,\" claims the Federation. \*\*\* With
the collaboration of Robert Dutrisac

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:905

\"We are dismayed,\" says Cyrille Béraud, president of the Fédération
québécoise des communautés et industries du libre (FQCIL), a lobby group
that defends the economic and social interests of free software in
Quebec. \"This is a blatant case of the right hand not knowing what the
left hand is doing. Such a call for tenders, launched by the highest
institution in the country, guarantor of our values and our common good,
goes against the will of the legislator. It also harms Quebec\'s
technological independence, innovation and does not promote sustainable
economic development.\" A Microsoft product Published Monday, the
National Assembly\'s call for tenders, emanating from the financial
resources and procurement department, aims to replace 600 office suites
and purchase 600 more as options, for a total of 1,200 software
programs. The document specifically targets Microsoft\'s Office Pro Plus
2010 product, thereby ignoring existing equivalents in the free software
field. The call for tenders, for this contract valued at between
\$900,000 and \$1.2 million, is open until February 28. The FQCIL is
demanding that it be cancelled outright and rewritten to include free
products such as OpenOffice.org or LibreOffice, which \"have amply
demonstrated throughout the world that they perfectly meet the needs of
organizations such as the National Assembly, while being much more
economical,\" says the organization. An illegal call In June 2010,
Superior Court Judge Denis Jacques had described as illegal and contrary
to the law this type of call for tenders that discriminates against free
software in favor of software from the American multinational Microsoft,
in a judgment rendered in the case opposing Savoir Faire Linux and the
Régie des rentes du Québec (RRQ). Summary: the company involved in free
software denounced the awarding by this public body of an IT contract to
Bill Gates\' company without having taken the trouble to evaluate a
replacement of its software with so-called free solutions. Worse, last
June, the National Assembly adopted Law 133 on the governance and
management of information resources of public bodies and government
companies, in which free software occupies an important place as a means
of \"ensuring the sustainability of government digital heritage\". In
harmony with the Jacques judgment, the text also specifies that the
state apparatus must in the future consider \"free software in the same
way as other software\". In recent months, the Charest government, like
the opposition, has come to the defense of free software and recognized
its importance in the current budgetary, social and digital context.
\"When it comes to free software, there are fine words and there is
reality,\" says Mr. Béraud, who points out that the adoption of this
type of product by the public administration can be a source of savings,
but also a way to stimulate the creation of a Quebec free software IT
industry. With these open and free formats, this type of application
whose source code is accessible to all programmers was imagined in
opposition to closed and proprietary applications controlled by a
handful of multinationals and associated with costly user licenses.
Despite our calls, it was not possible to speak to a representative of
the National Assembly yesterday. In several countries, such as the
United States, France or Brazil, the proliferation of free software is
encouraged in public organizations because of the savings that can
result, but also because of other advantages: free software opens the
door to more equitable access to technology and public data, creates
more secure computing environments, less sensitive to viruses, more
malleable, and the economic benefits are local\... For several digital
actors in Quebec, this free software is one of the components of a
democracy and governance that are part of the new digital reality.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:906

\"Program or be programmed,\" prophesied American essayist Douglas
Rushkoff, a specialist in new technologies, in his eponymous 2010 book
in which he expressed concern about contemporary digital illiteracy. Two
years later, it was all hands on deck: 2012 was proclaimed the \"Year of
Code\" and teaching computer science to these brainless people of the
Facebook generation became a public safety mission. Learning to program
means regaining control of the machines that rule our lives, enslaved to
the vibrations of our cell phones and the bombardment of notifications
from social networks. \"In the digital age, whoever has the keys to
programming ends up building the reality in which the rest of the world
lives,\" says Rushkoff. Whether they are designed by Facebook, Google or
Apple, deplores the essayist and fervent supporter of open source, we
conform to their visions, executing what their software commands,
without having the slightest idea of what is going on behind the screen.
Computers and networks have not always been a one-way medium. In the
80s, using a microcomputer and learning to program it were one and the
same thing. Anyone with a Commodore, Amstrad or Atari tried their hand
at coding. Then, computers became more and more user-friendly and it
was - fortunately - no longer necessary to master Basic to be able to
communicate. So why this sudden injunction to all become programmers?
\"Knowing how to program is like being able to speak while others can
only hear,\" adds the media guru. Knowledge that could prove to be a
powerful weapon in the years to come, underlines the Washington Post,
which presents hackers as the new political elite and code as \"the
lingua franca of web activists.\" Across the Atlantic, the number of
courses has exploded. One of the most publicized experiments is Code
Year, an online tool for learning programming that has attracted more
than 360,000 registered students, diligent in the exercises of
Codecademy, a coding school created by two students from Columbia
University in New York. In Great Britain, it is the Guardian that is
leading a Digital Literacy campaign aimed at improving the teaching of
technology and computer science in English schools. The idea is to learn
how a computer works and not just how to use it. Computer language,
while it may seem intimidating at first glance, is ultimately just a set
of instructions translated so that machines can read them. And there is
no age limit for getting involved. In France, the Hype(r)olds workshop
introduces women over 77 to the Web and the Coding Goûters make
programming child\'s play. Launched in January, notably by Jonathan
Perret, himself a computer scientist, this monthly event brings together
kids from 6 to 14 years old, who get their hands dirty with Robozzle (a
puzzle game that involves controlling a small robot with a set of simple
instructions), tinker with Scratch to create small interactive stories
and games, learn the Python language, or even create a game for iPad.
\"It\'s a place where you can explore, meet, fail, start over, have
fun.\" And eat cake, which doesn\'t hurt. http://codeyear.com
http://code.google.com/intl/fr/edu/ http://hyperolds.tumblr.com
http://ils.sont.la/ http://robozzle.com http://rur-ple.sourceforge.net/
http://scratch.mit.edu.acces.bibl.ulaval.ca/

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:907

After the controversies over nuclear power, GMOs and nanotechnologies,
is a new controversy brewing with an emerging field of life sciences,
synthetic biology? This is what the parliamentarians want to avoid, who,
in October 2010, asked the Parliamentary Office for the Evaluation of
Scientific and Technological Choices (Opecst) to produce a report on
\"the challenges of synthetic biology\", submitted on Wednesday 15
February. The letter of referral recalled that the aim was \"to allow a
calm discussion of the issues raised by the development of this field of
research\". The text written by the socialist MP for Isère, Geneviève
Fioraso, is both classic in some recommendations, original in others and
already criticized on the aspects concerning the question of
science-society dialogue, a usual pitfall of technoscientific
controversies. On the classic side, we find the well-documented
presentation of the context and definition of this famous synthetic
biology. It is \"an economic and scientific reality that cannot be
ignored,\" notes Geneviève Fioraso. But its definition already poses
initial problems. New science? New technology? Is it just biology or a
mix with computer science, mathematics and engineering? The MP quotes
biologist François Képès, from Genopole d\'Evry: \"Synthetic biology is
the engineering of biological components and systems that do not exist
in nature and the reengineering of existing systems. It focuses on the
intentional design of artificial biological systems rather than on
understanding natural biology.\" In this big bag, we find research aimed
at creating artificial genomes by assembling ad hoc genetic sequences or
work in which DNA would include molecules different from natural
molecules. We also find the creation of mutant viruses, the synthesis of
proteins from genetically modified bacteria. Or the creation of living
cells from basic chemical elements\... This resembles well-known things
like GMOs or the synthesis of insulin by modified bacteria, but it is a
little different. \"It is not a question of manufacturing a protein from
a single gene but of working on complicated metabolic circuits involving
several steps. In this case, the processes involved are not linear, and
modeling and interdisciplinarity are necessary,\" explains François
Képès, author of an educational work on the subject (La Biologie de
synthèse plus forte que la nature?, Le Pommier, 2011). The fruit of 160
meetings and hearings in France and abroad, the Opecst report does not
therefore cut across these definitions. It nevertheless identifies the
main approaches that inspire researchers as well as the different tools
they use (DNA sequencing, computer modeling or miniaturization). It also
cites the sectors likely to benefit from this progress, such as health,
energy (through the manufacture of biofuels in particular), materials,
etc. Remarkably, it does not give in to blind optimism, recalling for
example that developments will be slow. On these general aspects, the
report recommends several initiatives to promote the development of
research, the interdisciplinarity that accompanies it and the gateways
leading to applications. The report also, as it should, gives pride of
place to risk management and their assessment. But it also emphasizes
the little-known issue of intellectual property. \"We must not let
patentability drift over living things,\" recalls Geneviève Fioraso, who
mentions the well-known cases of GMOs or work on the human genome that
have made patents economic weapons to protect themselves from
competition rather than to promote innovation. The MP points out that
other models exist such as open access biology, inspired by free
software and which consists of sharing data as much as possible.
However, this system also has its limits. \"The American database also
contains patented elements, so it\'s a bit of a mess,\" notes François
Képès. The most anticipated point of the report concerns the delicate
question of science-society dialogue that resurfaces with each emergence
of a new theme. \"A consensus exists on the need for an open,
transparent dialogue, upstream of mass applications, in order to avoid
reproducing posturing and overly binary debates,\" recalls Geneviève
Fioraso. However, there are several ways to \"dialogue.\" The model
favored by the report was developed in the United Kingdom. A long
process, begun in 2007, allowed, in 2009, the organization of a
citizens\' conference (a representative panel trained on these issues
before debating them) which resulted, the following year, in
recommendations. Decentralization, duration, plurality of opinions,
information, serenity of the debates\... these were the ingredients of
success. \"It is a shame that France is looking towards the United
Kingdom,\" regrets sociologist Claire Marris (INRA, seconded to King\'s
College London), who has closely studied how this debate works. \"Public
dialogues were behind closed doors and by invitation,\" she recalls.
Above all, the objectives and definitions were set in advance of the
debate and not really open. And the citizens\' conference ultimately
resembled a survey. With Pierre-Benoît Joly (INRA), she had therefore
proposed, in a report submitted to the Ministry of Research, another
form of dialogue. This was also taken up for the creation of an
Observatory of Synthetic Biology, in December 2011, which the Opecst
report does not mention. \"In March, we will bring together our steering
committee of around twenty members to set the objectives of this
observatory led by the CNAM,\" specifies Ali Saib, the coordinator,
director of research at the Conservatoire national des arts et métiers.
This will involve identifying current events, stakeholders, and
everyone\'s positions on synthetic biology, before preparing a public
debate. The model is in fact the Nano forum organized by the CNAM and
the Vivagora association, particularly between 2007 and 2009. \"The goal
is to bring to life the controversies that can be useful for innovation.
The recipe is based on the sustainability of discussion structures,
pluralist management, knowledge sharing, and the explanation of issues
by everyone. It\'s very different from a citizens\' conference,\"
recalls Dorothée Benoit-Browaeys, general delegate of Vivagora. Opecst
did not choose this path. Which goes to show that synthetic biology also
promotes diversity in social engineering.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:908

The new contracts obtained by the geomarketing firm Inventis in recent
months have allowed it to achieve a 45% increase in its turnover.
\"Since our founding in 2005, Inventis\' turnover has increased by 20%
per year. After obtaining the contract with the United Nations in 2010,
the following contracts, obtained in 2011, increased our turnover by
45%,\" explains Mathieu Lahaye, president and founder of the company.
The entrepreneur, aged just 28 and winner of the Company of the Year
award at the Young Chamber of Commerce of Mauricie gala last year, has
obtained new contracts in recent months within engineering firms,
government agencies and manufacturing industries. Success in Geneva The
successful implementation of its program designed for the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) was undoubtedly the spearhead of
the growth of its company. \"It was a project to integrate three
databases,\" explains Mathieu Lahaye. \"The first was on the budgets
spent on all the refugee camps in the world, another on the census of
refugees and finally a geographic database: location of the camps, etc.
Our job was to group this information together and integrate it into a
digital map that provides precise management indicators. This allows
them, for example, to anticipate a mass arrival of refugees.\" The
Inventis project was implemented in February 2011 at the UNHCR
headquarters in Geneva and, subsequently, in the organization\'s
regional offices around the world. Diverse clientele Since 2011, a
pivotal year for Inventis, many companies and organizations have shown
interest in the geomarketing firm of the young Trois-Rivières
entrepreneur. In addition to the non-profit organizations that the
company has been serving for several years now, other organizations,
particularly in Quebec and Geneva, and companies from various sectors
benefit from Inventis\' management solutions. \"We also work with
insurance companies, banking institutions, CLDs and mining companies. We
have also been approached by companies in the oil sector in Alberta and
by aluminum smelters,\" lists Mathieu Lahaye. The system for integrating
databases into a geographic map could also be beneficial to retail.
Whether for a market study or to better adapt its offering, a merchant
could, using a virtual map, deploy a more effective marketing strategy
and thus better target its customers according to very specific
criteria. Market and export To date, 60% of Inventis\' market is
Canadian and 40% abroad. Mathieu Lahaye will later try to break into the
American market despite the economic problems and the difficulty in
benefiting from export assistance programs given the nature of his
business. \"As for assistance programs for SMEs, I believe there are
gaps,\" says the entrepreneur. \"Since 2005, we have been developing
without any government assistance or subsidies. So we have been very
cautious in our development.\" Free Software Inventis, since its
beginnings in business, has chosen to work with free software. Not only
can it offer low-cost business solutions, particularly for its clients
in the cultural sector, but it also sees advantages for its larger
clients. \"Almost everything we create is open source,\" says Mathieu
Lahaye. \"It\'s both an economic and technological choice. It\'s also in
line with our corporate vision. We don\'t want to force our customers to
buy licenses and annual updates. The source code of our programs is
accessible, so the customer is not tied to us.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:909

Until December 2010, few people in France had heard of OVH. The
WikiLeaks affair was then in full swing, Eric Besson, Minister of the
Digital Economy, revealed that an obscure technical service provider,
based in the industrial zone of Roubaix, was hosting this site described
as \"criminal\". For Octave Klaba, director of OVH, the media baptism of
fire was unexpected. It was, he says, in the press that he learned that
its data centers were hosting Julian Assange\'s site. A joke? No, OVH
was not troubled by the courts. Protected by high brick walls topped
with barbed wire, the OVH machines - for \"We host you\" - only
automatically provided storage space to a client, who turned out to be
mandated by WikiLeaks. \"Technical provider of the technical solution
that the client has ordered\", Octave Klaba does not interfere in
knowing the activity or the name of those who use his infrastructure, so
gigantic that WikiLeaks data occupies a nanometric space there. A
virtual megalopolis, OVH has three centers (Roubaix, Paris and
Strasbourg) that store 100,000 terabytes of data and consume as much
electricity as a city of 20,000 inhabitants. With 100,000 servers
installed in kilometers of racks, the company hosts 18 million sites. In
2011, OVH became the number 1 in Europe for hosting - one European site
in six, one French site in three. A place conquered in ten years, and
starting from scratch. At the origin of this nugget, a Polish couple and
their two sons, arrived in France in 1991 with 5,000 dollars in their
pockets. Sole shareholders of this company that employs 440 people and
has a turnover of 100 million, they have never relied on anything but
their strengths: venture capital, banking, the stock market, you know
nothing. So here is a family of four engineers aged 29 to 63 who
continue to live very simply and reinvest all their profits in the
company. The father, Henryk, \"Mr. Klaba\" as everyone calls him here,
is the president. A genius organizer and handyman, he invented a
technique for cooling servers using a water system that allowed OVH to
halve its energy costs. The mother, Halina, very discreet, takes care of
the finances. The eldest son, Octave, who had the idea for OVH before
bringing the whole family on board, is its CEO. He is the creative, the
visionary who sees the Internet as \"a magma of ideas overflowing from a
permanently erupting volcano and when he comes into contact with it,
ideas cool down quickly.\" Finally, there is the little brother,
Miroslaw, alias Miro, the head of research, who defines himself as the
family peacemaker. A 100% Klaba cast, in a very young company (average
age 27), with almost no hierarchy. His story has its roots in that of
Polish emigration in the last century, with Marian Klaba, Octave and
Miro\'s grandfather, born near Béthune, in the 1920s, to a father from
the mining region of Silesia. Like his father, Marian \"hired\" in the
mine at the age of 13. Having become French, he married in 1946 a \"pure
Polish woman he met in France\", according to Octave, who became the
spokesperson for the painful family memory. The young girl came from a
family of farmers who owned apple orchards in Poland before the frost
forced them to sell their land and go \"to the coalface\", literally, in
France. Marian\'s father-in-law, deep in the mine, dreams of rebuilding
an orchard in Poland. He regularly sends money to his brother who has
remained in the country so that he can buy land. The end of the Second
World War comes, Poland needs to be rebuilt, it is time to leave:
Marian, his wife and his parents-in-law try to return to the Polish land
and apples. \"They came back by train,\" says Octave, happily. \"Getting
out of the mine has always been the goal in the family.\" But no orchard
awaits them: the uncle has spent everything gambling. Back to square one
and to the mine, in Poland this time, because the Iron Curtain has
fallen and the new communist authorities forbid the couple from
returning to France, even though they both have French nationality. \"It
was hopeless but there was nothing to be done,\" continues Octave. \"The
family spirit of resistance comes from there.\" In 1949, the couple have
a son, Henryk. The little family registered at the French consulate,
just in case. \"In fact, they were considered foreign agents,\" Octave
recounts, \"very closely monitored, and forbidden from leaving the
country.\" Raised to hate communists, young Henryk was destined for a
mining career. But he would make the most of the socialist education
system: he entered the Warsaw Polytechnic and graduated as an engineer.
There he met Halina, who would become his wife. While still a student,
she gave birth to Octave in 1975. Miro was born seven years later. \"Our
childhood was happy,\" Octave remembers, \"even if all you could find
was vinegar in the shops. The D system teaches you to get by.\" The
family lived in Walbrzych, not far from the Czech border, in Silesia,
the birthplace of the Klaba. Henryk, a hard worker, rose through the
socialist hierarchy, but without ever mixing with the nomenklatura. He
ended his career at the head of a kolkhoz of 550 people and 2,000
hectares. \"A born engineer,\" says Miro. \"The kind who makes you look
up in the middle of a potato field to show you the details of the
electrical lines that cross it.\" It was in the 1980s that the Klaba,
immersed in this \"Geo Trouvetou\" atmosphere while Poland was in the
midst of an uprising, discovered microcomputing. Having left to buy a
car, Henryk returned home with an Amstrad computer. His two sons turned
out to be very precocious geeks. Octave \"coded\" before he had blown
out his ten candles and debugged the accounting system of his father\'s
kolkhoz in exchange for chocolates. Miro knew how to type his name
before he knew how to write it. After the fall of the Berlin Wall in
1989, the hope of going to France was reborn, and exchanges with the
Klaba who had remained in France intensified. Henryk\'s cousins went to
the north of France on a tourist visa. \"They stayed there and we said
to ourselves that if we wanted to try our luck, we\'d better hurry up
before the authorities blocked us,\" recalls Octave, who was 16 at the
time. One day, the parents solemnly asked their two sons to choose
between the two countries. \"They told us that for them, it was too late
to start a new life elsewhere. It was up to us to decide.\" Banco. The
Klabas sold everything, lived without furniture for a year and, in 1990,
there they were, crossing the border in their Wartburg (a Trabant, but
bigger) with their lives in a trunk. The arrival was tough. \"We
swallowed our pride and went,\" summed up Octave. The kolkhoz director
ended up as a turner and milling machine operator. Octave, who didn\'t
speak a word of French, dropped down from second to fourth. He
eventually integrates thanks to his moped with which he gains his
freedom, and his heavy metal band. He hangs on, passes his baccalaureate
and goes into preparatory class before joining, like his brother later,
the Catholic Institute of Arts and Crafts in Lille. So here he is, an
\"engineer\", like dad. However, Octave Klaba dreams of anything but a
\"career\". He sums up the five weeks he spent at Alcatel in Rennes, his
only professional experience outside of OVH: \"It killed me.\" \"Oles
von Herman\" (this is the pseudonym he found for himself in maths sup,
out of \"pure delirium\") has long spent his days and nights on his
personal online page, a hodgepodge of forums and small self-service
\"utilities\", like page counters. He is looking for a host for his
increasingly large site. Young Octave finally finds refuge on the server
of an American from Pennsylvania. \"There was nothing in France,
nothingness.\" The little money he earned, he swallowed up in hours of
connection. Traffic increased, content exploded and the American could
not keep up. SOS. \"I don\'t know what came over me, I didn\'t have a
penny but I took the first plane with my server under my arm to come and
help him,\" he recalls. A shock that would decide his future. He
expected \"a futuristic clean room\", he came across \"a wooden hut with
two old bikes. It opened my eyes to the back of the Internet store, it
was very easy.\" Back in France, he started his own hosting business.
OVH ceased to be a pseudonym and became the acronym of a very sharing
association in the spirit of free software. \"Not only did I earn
nothing, but I spent all the money from my internships helping people
and hosting their sites. They only paid once, and even then.sent our
first reminder letter\"The Klaba parents do not share their son\'s
choices: \"They would have liked their engineer son to find a \"real\"
job. For them, I was a fanatic, which was not wrong.\" At the beginning
of 2000, Octave convinced them to lend him 7,000 euros to transform OVH
into a company. The first premises were a cellar and the beginnings were
difficult, but Octave found support in particular from Xavier Niel, a
successful entrepreneur who had just launched Free. Niel lent him a
basement in eastern Paris to install his first server farms. Like Niel
with Free, Octave was finally able to develop a hosting model that would
break prices. His secret? Doing everything himself. From assembling the
servers to designing the racks to the architecture of the data centers,
the last of which, Roubaix-4, no longer even needed air conditioning. To
supply its Strasbourg data centers, the company has launched into energy
production by investing in a wind farm in Lorraine. \"Mastering
technology is the key to lowering costs,\" explains Octave, \"the only
thing we don\'t save on is salaries.\" After opening sixteen
subsidiaries - the first is in Poland and the last in Senegal - OVH is
launching an assault on the North American market, the largest in the
world. Octave has just moved with his wife and children to Montreal,
OVH\'s bridgehead for the conquest of the New World. \"Across the
Atlantic, hosting providers are four times more expensive than OVH, and
they don\'t understand our model,\" he says. \"We have to hurry up and
take advantage of it. We\'re going to show them that we\'re not Care
Bears.\" We never doubted it. photos Christophe Alix

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:910

When the media talk about WikiLeaks and its explosive revelations, the
use of warlike images - bombs or grenades - is commonplace. The artist
Julian Oliver has given substance to these expressions with his latest
project Transparency Grenade, the prototype of which was presented at
the Transmediale festival in Berlin. His weapon of mass disclosure
faithfully reproduces the very popular Soviet F1 grenade, but inside its
plexiglass shell, it conceals a computer, a microphone and a powerful
Wi-Fi antenna. Once the pin is pulled, it can intercept data transiting
on the targeted network: IP addresses of computers, HTML pages,
downloaded images, fragments of emails. It also captures conversations
that it transmits securely and anonymously to a dedicated server. This
data is then made public on an online map, at the location where the
\"detonation\" took place. "The lack of transparency from industry and
government has been a topic of great controversy, and our only tool for
greater openness is the slow and tedious process of political reform.
The Transparency Grenade overcomes these frustrations. Leaking secret
information is as easy as pulling the pin," the statement said. The aim
is to facilitate leaks by introducing the weapon into important private
meetings, with the complicity of an infiltrator. Not exactly discreet,
one might object. "Originally, the project was to take the form of a
very small 'information bomb' that could be fixed under the table or
hidden inside objects," explains the New Zealand artist. "I chose the
grenade for its iconic side, an object symptomatic of our times,
embodying its fears and contradictions." At the same time, he is
developing an Android application, which could run silently and
invisibly in the background of a phone, with similar functions.
\"Obviously, it is impossible to legally provide this kind of service,\"
admits Oliver, who \"will have to be content with providing the source
code and the instructions to carry it out.\" Another reservation is the
level of protection of the targeted network, which could hinder the
proper functioning of the grenade. These are all tasks that the
hacktivist is working on. Julian Oliver, who describes himself as a
\"critical engineer,\" operates at the interface of art and technology.
He is also one of the developers of Newstweek, a tool that allows you to
\"reestablish the facts\" by manipulating the news. Connected to the
wireless network of a café or an airport, you are reading Le Figaro or
the BBC on your tablet, your iPhone or laptop, and suddenly certain
headlines puzzle you. Then you are a victim of Newstweek. Through this
discreet device hidden in a socket, a remote person can modify in real
time the information transiting through a public Wi-Fi access point
before it reaches the screen. The project, which won an award at the Ars
Electronica, questions the reliability of the media and the trust we
place in them, allowing each citizen to distort the news and manipulate
the media in turn. As with the grenade, the detailed manufacturing
method is online, in open source. transparencygrenade.com
weise7.org/labor-berlin-8 newstweek.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:911

CREATED BY THE LAW of 17 July 2001, collective interest cooperative
societies (SCICs) are now 18 years old and are doing well, despite the
crisis. \"The average turnover of SCICs has almost doubled since 2007\",
indicates the research department of the General Confederation of
Cooperative and Participative Societies (SCOP), which will publish, on
Thursday 9 February, the statistical overview of the evolution of SCICs
over the past decade. Each year, invariably since 2004, between 25 and
30 SCICs are created and develop with remarkable sustainability. Out of
a total of 224 creations accumulated since the existence of the status,
190 are still in activity, while on national average one in two
companies ceases its activity after five years. This innovative form of
business represents a potential for creating non-relocatable jobs that
is set to grow, because \"they promote public-private partnerships and
the economic development of territories for entire sectors of the
economy that, without being 100% public, are activities of general
interest, such as the environment, land management or accommodation.
There are needs that the public sector no longer has an interest in
meeting alone\", believes Patrick Lenancker, president of the General
Confederation of SCOPs. Established throughout France in the environment
(22%), agriculture (19%), commerce (4%), housing (5%) or culture (13%),
SCICs have the particularity of being able to associate local
authorities with their capital and governance. Municipalities,
departments and regions can thus invest up to 20% of the capital of a
SCIC. In 2010, their participation in the capital was on average 13%.
\"All other cooperative models are \"single-memberships\". Farmers come
together to buy together, or employees to produce. Until the creation of
SCICs, there was no organization that would bring together the sometimes
contradictory interests of the different stakeholders,\" explains
Patrick Lenancker. SCICs bring together three types of partners:
employees, users or customers, but also public or voluntary authorities,
or even financiers. In 2010, 66% of the members were individuals and 34%
were legal entities. \"Non-relocatable employment\" SCICs thus
facilitate the change in scale of social economy companies
(associations, cooperatives). Initially, this form of cooperative
attracted stakeholders already familiar with these particular business
models, who were hampered in their development by the legal constraints
of their organization. The green electricity supplier Enercoop has thus
chosen to transform its SCOP into a SCIC to invite local authorities to
become partners, which was prohibited in the form of a SCOP. This is
also the motivation of the iMaugis association, in the process of
creating a SCIC planned for summer 2012. Fabian Pilard, the co-manager
of this free software IT service provider company based in
Champagne-Ardenne, explains: \"We made the cooperative choice to adopt a
professional structure while maintaining our values. The SCIC
corresponds to our approach of co-construction with local stakeholders -
the commune of Charleville-Mézières, department, region - to create
non-relocatable employment and to be able to offer solutions at the
right price. In other forms of cooperative, legal entities would not
have been able to integrate the company\'s capital.\" In total, 41% of
SCICs are the result of transformations of associations or SCOPs. But
the number of creations ex nihilo has increased, rising from 50% in 2007
to 59% in 2010. \"The SCIC nevertheless remains a confidential usage
model\", acknowledges Mr. Lenancker. SCICs in fact belong to the
category of lightweights in the economy: the largest turnover is today
12.5 million euros and the average workforce is 13.6 employees. When the
issues are strategic for local authorities, such as health or water
distribution, the General Confederation of SCOPs must still fight to
promote the model.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:912

The case caused a stir at the end of 2010: a young American researcher
had apparently discovered a bacterium capable of surviving in an
environment rich in arsenic. Even worse, the microbe had apparently
integrated this poison into its DNA, in place of phosphorus. Enough to
call into question the most well-established certainties about the
universal architecture of hereditary heritage! The author of this
sensational breakthrough, Felisa Wolfe-Simon, then an astrobiologist at
NASA, the American space agency, and at the USGS, the geological agency,
benefited from a more than enviable launch in the media: NASA had
organized a press conference to announce the discovery, published
simultaneously in the journal Science. But questions quickly arose about
the validity of her observations. Some did not fail to point out that
the bacterium in question had not been named GFAJ by chance: \"Give
Felisa a Job\" referred to the precarious professional situation of the
young researcher, who needed to publish results to promote her hiring -
a situation, it is true, far from being the exception in the world of
research. More seriously, specialists in the field pointed out
methodological inadequacies in the demonstration. The bacterium came
from the brackish mud of Mono Lake, in California. Felisa Wolfe-Simon
had gradually weaned it off phosphorus, by simultaneously increasing the
arsenic content of the culture medium, to see if the latter, close on a
physicochemical level, would not replace it in its metabolism. Science
in the making When questioned in the heat of the moment, microbiologists
expressed their doubts. For the demonstration to be complete, they
noted, many verifications were still missing: making crystallographic
images, to visualize the arsenic at the heart of DNA, for example. Rosie
Redfield, a microbiologist at the University of British Columbia,
quickly took the lead in the protest. On her blog, she criticized
Science for not having required these verifications before publishing
such spectacular results. Like other skeptics, she sent the journal a
critical \"comment\", which duly gave rise to a response from Felisa
Wolfe-Simon\'s team: the latter maintained its initial conclusions. The
logical next step was therefore to try to reproduce its results,
independently. This is a classic approach in principle: it allows us to
verify that the observations are solid. But it is not always done,
because the time spent risks being hardly productive, in terms of
publications: scientific journals want something new, not an exact copy
of results published previously. While there is a chance that the
initial result will be invalidated, the risk is worth taking. Rosie
Redfield therefore asked Felisa Wolfe-Simon for GFAJ samples and set
about replicating the experiment. But she did it in a new way: she used
her blog to share with the public and the community of microbiologists
all the steps of this \"remake\". Rosie Redfield is indeed a follower of
\"open science\", a movement that seeks, in line with open source in
computing, to share the process of scientific production with as many
people as possible. In this movement, some go so far as to put their
laboratory notebook online, with all the raw data. This is not the case
for Rosie Redfield, but reading her blog has offered a fascinating
glimpse of science in the making for months. Where are we now? The final
checks carried out by a Princeton student, in collaboration with the
Canadian researcher, show no trace of arsenic in GFAJ\'s DNA. Is the die
cast? Questioned by Nature, Science\'s rival, Felisa replied that she
\"did not fully understand the results and the conditions of the
experiment on the website\", and said she hoped that these would be
published in a peer-reviewed journal, \"because that is how science
progresses best\". So Rosie submitted a manuscript to Science on January
30. Will it take up the challenge?

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:913

Two competitors, specialists in information and document management,
have decided to pool their software and expertise in a consortium that
will now offer free software solutions for integrated document
management (IDM) by businesses and public organizations. DocuLibre and
Gestar each offered their own integrated document management solution.
But after a few chance meetings, the two presidents, Rida Benjelloun
(DocuLibre) and Michel Roberge (Gestar), realized that their two
companies had very complementary strengths. \"I\'m into technology,
he\'s into business,\" summarizes Rida Benjelloun. In reality, their
respective skills are much broader. Michel Roberge is Quebec\'s IDM
specialist. He wrote the first and only Quebec book on the subject, and
last year he published another book on the hierarchical classification
scheme for administrative documents. Rida Benjelloun is a specialist in
electronic information management, semantic search engines and open
source software. DocuLibre supports the official search engine of the
Government of Quebec and those of more than 400 sites of ministries and
other affiliated organizations. Gestar offered its own software for
document management, OmniDok, while DocuLibre had developed an open
source software suite, IntelliGID. DocuLibre also created a government
open source software \"community\" in 2011 with users of its software.
Gestar, which has been working in this field for more than 25 years,
decided to join it by contributing the OmniDok code and the
DocumentFaire methodology to the IntelliGID community. \"This is the
first time in Quebec that I have seen a private company contribute
commercial software to an open source community,\" says Rida Benjelloun.
This is a sign of confidence from Gestar, and it will allow us to offer
a GID solution in Quebec as well as internationally.\" No merger The
concept of free communities was not yet very familiar to Michel Roberge.
\"I asked Rida if we could create a community on classification schemes.
By working with hundreds of clients, we have developed a huge amount of
knowledge. The idea is to make our structure accessible free of charge
to users to avoid them investing unnecessarily, because in the end, the
scheme is repeated from one place to another. The crux of the matter is
the support and training of the personnel who will use the system.\" The
two companies have not merged, but to work closely together, the
DocuLibre team will soon move into Gestar\'s offices.
passelin@lesoleil.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:914

\"In terms of technology, Quebec is generally behind, and this delay is
also felt in the modernization of the State,\" says Sylvain Carle, a
major player on the digital scene in Quebec and organizer of this
GouvCamp (http://www.gouvcamp.org). This meeting will therefore be an
opportunity to bring together people from various backgrounds who are
thinking about this subject and who, above all, now want to take
action.\" A pure product of digital culture, the principle of BarCamp,
which modulates its name according to the subjects it addresses \--
GouvCamp for questions concerning democracy 2.0, PodCamp on podcasts,
YULCamp on the technological development of Montreal \--, is intended to
be a meeting of citizen-experts during which each participant is both
audience and speaker. These unconferences are organized through social
networks and the Web and subsequently use these same tools to
disseminate the ideas and content they have generated. A moderator is in
charge of supervising the conversations. Democracy issues The first
GouvCamp will take shape on February 22 in Quebec City on the sidelines
of the WAQ (Web in Quebec City) conference, which brings together
technology experts. Between 40 and 75 people are expected to discuss
topics related to the opening of public data, the current use of
government budgets in terms of technology, transparency, digital
citizenship, communication between the government apparatus and
citizens. Among others. The themes are brought by the participants
according to their interests and expertise. \"Until now, the government
has approached these issues timidly,\" says Mr. Carle. We sense that it
is not very comfortable with it. GouvCamp is an opportunity to take
advantage of the thinking and ideas of citizen experts who can certainly
help the government in its modernization process,\" and this, in a
\"pragmatic logic,\" continues the man who recently, online, called on
Quebec to adopt a \"Nerds Plan\" to bring the province into the digital
reality of the present, rather than a Plan Nord widely publicized by the
Charest government. \"In the government apparatus, technology suffers
from being only in the hands of financial managers,\" he says. But
today, we can no longer see it solely as a simple production tool. It is
a social issue.\" The BarCamp principle was born in 2005 in California
in the offices of an IT company that held the first of these
unconferences where each participant must put a concrete idea, a
project, a documented analysis on the table. Its theme: free software.
Since then, this tool for exchange and collaboration, deeply rooted in
the culture of Web 2.0, has multiplied its founding principle everywhere
on the planet: \"no spectators, everyone participants\".

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:915

Launched in 2010 by two 23-year-old Frenchmen, Makesense.org aims to
help social entrepreneurs around the world carry out their projects with
the help of volunteers wherever they are. In the process, they have
developed a new working method. Christian Vanizette and Romain Ranguin
met at Euromed, a business school in Marseille. Candidates are chosen
based on their projects, and the teaching is adapted to what they need
to carry them out. It is therefore "necessarily proactive and
necessarily à la carte," explains Christian, and different from the case
studies at Harvard (which seems to have understood that change was
needed). Tahitian (on his father's side) and Vietnamese (on his mother's
side), Christian, whom I met in Paris, has the charm of a mixed-race
person slowly blossoming in the sun and the dynamism of an entrepreneur
who already knows very well what he wants: to change the world without
taking himself for Mother Teresa. Attracted by what Muhammad Yunus means
by \"social business\" - a company that does not lose money, does not
distribute dividends, and whose objective is to solve a social problem -
Christian and Romain decide to go and see how things work in Asia, in
early 2010. Without contacts and without preparation, they arrive in New
Delhi with open arms. First initiative, \"a funny video followed by a
tweet\" to announce themselves. A well-known blogger spots them and
allows them to benefit from his megaphone. They tour the subcontinent,
going, at the pace of their inspiration, \"from cool encounter to cool
encounter\". Each one is the opportunity to make a video on which their
interlocutors tell the challenges they have to solve. They put
everything on their blog we.makesense.org, because they had the
intelligence to invest the 1,000 euros won in a school competition in
the purchase of this fabulous domain name. On their return, they
launched a website that didn\'t take off, until they realized that they
also needed to create an offline dynamic. \"It was the combination of
the two that made our trip successful,\" explains Christian. They then
started organizing workshops: 80 in 2011, and already 25 by the end of
January 2012. All this thanks to a Facebook page on which social
entrepreneurs are invited to present their \"challenges\": how to better
sell paper bags produced by Indian women, for example. Business,
technology and design But style is business. Vocabulary counts.
Makesense is a multitude of \"gangs\" made of \"gangsters.\" And the
workshops are \"hold-ups.\" \"Influenced by 1990s rap,\" says Christian
with an angelic air, while affirming his desire to be \"offbeat\"
compared to the language of big companies. The method is
well-established, and Makesense is preparing to launch an application
for organizing \"hold-ups.\" Requests for help will fall into three
categories: business, technology and design. Those who want to lend a
hand will have the choice between four modalities: I can help, I know
someone, I pass the message on and I create a hold-up. \"Depending on
the type of challenge, we will send him a certain method: a way to
organize a brainstorming session or a \"hackathon\" \[meeting of
programmers\] if it is about technology, for example.\" A layer of
gaming techniques means that \"people have fun solving social
challenges.\" Those who help with the organization range from DJ Dude to
DJ Buddha. Inspired by open source working methods (Apache and
Wordpress), their platform is taken up by other initiatives
(SenseSchool.org for schools, for example). It all comes down to a
concept, outsourcing to small, connected and motivated groups, which is
hesitant to find its name: why not gangsourcing or tribesourcing?

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:916

In 2006, the Lektrolab collective rehabilitated the art of teletext at
the Rotterdam Film Festival, inviting artists to take over this service
that allows channels to broadcast news in text form on the television
screen. They made available free software so that everyone could imagine
alternatives to boring program schedules. The naughty German cable
channels had nevertheless gotten ahead of them in creative diversion, as
shown by the Teletex Babez collection, flashy and suggestive images,
despite their large pixels. In March, in Helsinki, the International
Teletext Art Festival will be held. You have until January 25 to submit
your creations, which will be broadcast for a month on YLE, the prudish
Finnish public television which nevertheless specifies that porn is
prohibited\... http://drx.a-blast.org/\~drx/projects/teletext/
index.en.htmlhttp://www.fixc.fi/itaf/

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:917

More than 1,200 Revenu Québec employees were able to purchase the
Microsoft Office Professional suite, worth \$669, for personal use for
just \$11. This is therefore a benefit worth more than \$800,000 that
Microsoft had granted, before the end of 2011, to employees of the
Agence québécoise du revenu. Revenu Québec indicated, in response to an
access to information request by Le Soleil, that this is a program (Home
Use Program or HUP) offered by Microsoft to any client of a business
contract. In fact, the multinational did not make an exception for
Revenu Québec. The Home Use Program has existed for several years, in
both the private and public sectors. Except that the Regulation
respecting ethics and discipline in the Quebec public service stipulates
that \"a public servant may not accept any gift, token of hospitality or
other benefit other than those customary and of modest value. Any other
gift or benefit received must be returned to the donor or to the
State.\" \"We consider that there is no benefit, neither for Revenu
Québec nor for its employees,\" observes Manon Tremblay, spokesperson
for the Agency. \"It is not a gift because employees pay (\$11) for the
office suite\... It is an offer that Microsoft makes to several of its
clients. It is not as employees of Revenu Québec that they have access
to this offer. If they worked for another organization of the same size,
they would have access to the same program.\" The same is true at the
Syndicat de la fonction publique du Québec. \"Employees will be more
familiar and therefore more efficient, that is why Microsoft offers it
to its clients\...\", believes the president of the Union, Lucie
Martineau. So, we do not really see a conflict of interest.\" However,
she admits, if an employee received a computer for free, \"it would be a
taxable benefit. Here the software is not provided for free, it is a
discount, as if I were a Ford employee and the company offered me a
discount to buy a car.\" Microsoft itself justifies this program by
saying that people who use it at home gain experience with the product.
In reality, the practice appeared in 2003 to pass the introduction, by
Microsoft in 2001, of software assurance, which now required users to
pay an annual fee to benefit from updates, among other things. The
Quebec government thus buys tens of thousands of these licenses each
year, for several million dollars. Dependence Microsoft\'s strategy is
obvious, according to Daniel Pascot, professor of organizational
information systems at the Faculty of Administration and spokesperson
for FACIL, an organization that promotes free computing. The goal is to
make people dependent on its platform. \"The more people use Office at
home, the more the employer is encouraged to stay with Microsoft. If, on
the contrary, people used OpenOffice, they would ask the Ministry: why
pay hundreds of dollars to Microsoft when you can do it for free?
\"According to him, \"if the public administration makes software
available to everyone, it should offer free software.\" Such initiatives
are also taking place in France, where the administrative region of
Paris (Île-de-France) has announced that it would offer a new version of
the LibreOffice suite to high school students, their parents, their
teachers and administrative staff, i.e. nearly a million users, for the
2012 school year. passelin@lesoleil.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:918

Humanitarian aid is going techno. After giving more than two million
laptops to underprivileged children around the world, an American NGO is
launching its ultra-rugged, solar-powered tablet. Saving the world, one
tablet at a time. Since 2006, the American NGO One Laptop per Child has
been promoting humanitarian aid, modern version. To educate poor
children, there\'s nothing better than providing them with a free
computer packed with educational software, the NGO maintains. No fewer
than 2.4 million of these computers have been shipped to 46 countries to
children aged 6 to 12. But in this era where tablets are all the rage,
the NGO is adding a touchpad for underprivileged children to its range.
The XO 3.0 tablet, unveiled last week at the Consumer Electronic Show in
Las Vegas, has all the assets to go deep into the South American jungle
or the African desert. Its long-lasting battery is recharged by solar
energy (a world first for a tablet); its screen is readable even in
bright light. And the construction is robust; perfect for a young child
who has never laid hands on such a technological object. And if the sun
is scarce? It also recharges by hand, with a crank. On the software
side, it unsurprisingly relies on open source software like Linux, while
opening a door to the Android system. The latter is full of
applications, many of which are educational. equity \"It is the logical
successor to our laptops,\" said the foundation\'s chief engineer,
Edward McNierney, last week. \"And our tablet requires low energy
consumption, a critical issue for children in developing countries.\"
Currently, the previous generation of computers has found buyers in Peru
and Rwanda, among others. For now, the foundation prefers to target
countries and schools rather than scattering the devices left and right.
For example, when a Rwandan child gets a computer, all his classmates
get one too. It\'s a question of fairness, and above all, of not
marginalizing those who don\'t have access to technology. Computers -
and soon tablets - are always given to children. Never lent. The idea of
using computers to promote education in poorer countries germinated 10
years ago in the mind of Nicholas Negroponte, a professor at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He launched One Laptop Per Child
in 2005 at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland.
sauger@lesoleil.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:919

Sherbrooke - A \"critical choice for the future\" awaits the Charest
government in February, cornered by the giant Microsoft, which will stop
supporting its Windows XP operating system in two years. The result? A
massive migration to be expected for the government\'s 400,000 or so
computer workstations, estimated at \$800 million. Figures deemed still
too timid by Benoît des Ligneris, president of the Association
professionnelle des entreprises de logiciellibres (APELL) and Révolution
Linux. \"The migration is estimated at approximately \$2,000 per
workstation. We believe that the real total cost is more like \$3,000 to
\$6,000 per unit. Like all major projects, we are unable to predict the
exact expense, but we believe that it could go up to \$2.6 billion,\" he
says. To counter this budgetary hemorrhage, Mr. des Ligneris is
proposing the use of a free office suite. A solution that would offer
savings "in the order of 20%," with European precedents to back it up.
In Finland, in particular, a project carried out on more than 10,000
workstations made it possible to cut \$4.5 million from the bill, or
more than half. "Free software offers incredible potential for savings
and sustainable development," assures the Sherbrooke entrepreneur. "I
often use an analogy with a house: in the case of proprietary software,
like Microsoft Office, you are tenants, you pay every month to use the
property. With free software, you become the owner. These are not the
same rights and responsibilities, you have to maintain it, pay
insurance, but from the time you acquire it, it is a lifelong
investment. "After ten years of paying rent, you have nothing at all.
But the house, it belongs to you," he illustrates. Beyond a \"computer
scientist problem\", Mr. des Ligneris speaks of a choice of governance
and advocates for a direction that \"will not be controlled by a single
company and that will allow us to detach ourselves from technology\".
\"Developing for a particular company is a mistake,\" he maintains.
\"Who knows what the market will look like in ten years. The open
standard is more secure, we protect ourselves.\" Time to choose The
Secretary and Chief Information Officer, Marc Lacroix, has mandated an
interdepartmental working group to recommend the position to take and
the actions to put forward collectively from the beginning of next
month. And the president of APELL makes no secret of it: his industry is
claiming to be a serious candidate. \"We hope that the open standard
will be adopted,\" he confirms. Already, signs are pointing in this
direction. Like the adoption of Bill 133 in 2010, \"the first
legislation in North America that established a policy favorable to free
software,\" according to Mr. des Ligneris. This Act respecting the
governance and management of information resources of public bodies and
government enterprises stipulates that free software must be considered
when replacing, acquiring, renewing or upgrading software within
departments. \"The free software industry has always been greeted with a
certain skepticism as long as there was no government support,\" admits
the businessman. \"We were not very big, and therefore, not very
credible.\" An enthusiasm that was however tempered by decree 1111-2011,
promulgated less than a year after Bill 133, and which authorizes, under
certain conditions, private agreements with many suppliers of
proprietary software. Its adoption immediately caused \"quite a stir\"
among APELL members. However, Mr. des Ligneris specifies that no
agreement has yet been reached since the decree was adopted and hopes
that the situation remains as it is. \"Of course, we would have
preferred not to see this decree, but the framework that is being
implemented seems to us to be in line with the real desire of the Centre
de services partagés du Québec not to transgress the law.\" \"It is up
to us to be the watchdogs, and we will be.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:920

It\'s hard to miss the faces of the contributors and directors of the
online encyclopedia Wikipedia. From November 2011 to early January,
every time you searched, their portraits appeared at the top of the
page, inviting you to make a donation. Susan and her long white hair.
Rémi Mathis, president of Wikimedia France, with his schoolboy look.
Jimmy Wales, the American founder. Some 450 million people consult
Wikipedia each month. The encyclopedia is translated into 280 languages
(including the twelve regional ones in France) and offers 1.1 million
articles in French, consulted by 18.8 million readers. The fifth most
visited site in the world is a company apart. The first four (Google,
Yahoo!, YouTube and Facebook) have raised colossal investments, finance
themselves through advertising, employ thousands of employees and
conduct costly marketing campaigns. Wikipedia, for its part, operates
with 7.6 million dollars (6 million euros), 95 employees, tens of
thousands of volunteer editors. And without advertising. Independent,
the participatory encyclopedia is 85% funded by donations from
individuals, the rest coming from foundations. The last fundraising
campaign, which ended on January 3, broke a record: 20 million dollars,
or 15.3 million euros, donated by 1 million people. These donations will
help develop Wikipedia and its complementary projects: the multilingual
dictionary Wiktionary, the news center Wikinews, the digital libraries
Wikibooks (educational) and Wikisource (universal), the collection of
quotes Wikiquotes, the educational platform Wikiversity, the media
library Wikimedia Commons, the directory of living species Wikispecies.
A colossal amount of free, illustrated knowledge, constantly updated. A
library of Babel containing all knowledge, worthy of the one imagined by
Borges in Fictions. How can we explain such success, which contradicts
all economic models? The history of Wikipedia is as eventful as it is
enlightening. In March 2000, Jimmy Wales, majority shareholder of
Bomis.com, an online search portal for erotic-pornographic images,
launched Nupedia, an encyclopedia on the Net. He hired an
editor-in-chief, Larry Sanger, who formed a scientific committee. The
first articles were validated. But then a programmer explained to them
the principle of the \"wiki\", a website whose visitors could modify the
pages - \"wiki-wiki\" meaning \"fast\" in Hawaiian. On January 15, 2001,
financed by Jimmy Wales, Wikipedia was launched, with an appeal to
readers. The new site was soon swamped with articles and, very quickly,
Wikipedia expanded throughout the world, taken over by teams of
passionate volunteers. Wikipedia is part of the cooperative movement
born with the Internet. It is inspired by the principles of \"copyleft\"
(which authorizes, as opposed to copyright, the free distribution and
modification of a work) and free software (whose use, modification and
duplication are permitted, technically and legally). Two fundamental
texts, written by two former hackers, influence Wikipedians. First, an
essay, The Cathedral and the Bazaar, by Eric Raymond (not translated,
ed. O\'Reilly Media, 1999), which defends \"the logic of the bazaar\":
if a multitude of contributors intervene on a project without obeying a
hierarchy or a master plan, they develop a work in motion, not a frozen
cathedral. Then, \"The Free Universal Encyclopedia\", an appeal put
online by Richard Stallman in 1999. The father of the free GNU operating
system called for the creation of a free and participatory encyclopedia:
\"In the past, encyclopedias were written under the direction of a
single, centralized body. It would not make sense to develop the free
encyclopedia in this way.\" This cooperative and libertarian philosophy
is the basic rule of Wikipedia, which has given itself the slogan: \"The
freely distributable encyclopedia project that everyone can improve.\"
In June 2003, Jimmy Wales transferred his property rights to the
Wikimedia Foundation. It is run by the founders of the site and
representatives elected by the associations of active Wikipedians
(around thirty in 2010). Jimmy Wales, named one of the 100 most
influential people by Time in 2006, no longer has a leading role there.
He is in charge of Creative Commons, an organization that aims to
develop copyright contracts that allow the sharing of knowledge, works,
data and universal access to culture, education and research. He
explains to us: \"Wikipedia is a temple of the mind, a place to learn
and share knowledge, not a commercial space. Commerce should not invade
every sphere of our lives. We are both a public service and a common
good.\" No merchants in the temple, free cooperation, decentralization,
these are the principles. But how, by appealing to the public, can you
write a reliable encyclopedia, without amateurism, that does not become
a free-for-all or a place of all manipulations? It is very difficult.
Since its creation, Wikipedia has been torn between its two original
requirements: the concern for expert proofreading desired by Larry
Sanger, in the tradition of the great encyclopedists since Diderot and
d\'Alembert, and the richness of editorial material that is sometimes
approximate, biased, little referenced, provided by thousands of
enthusiasts or sectarian minds. To avoid these pitfalls, the founders
have put in place, year after year, ethical rules. The first is
\"neutrality of point of view\", or \"describing the debate rather than
engaging in it\". Each contributor must also present \"the different
points of view of a controversy\", emphasizing the best supported ones,
with reliable and authoritative sources. Thus the Internet user
discovers the famous \"Ref. required\" or \"Non-neutral article\" for
texts deemed imperfect. Since anyone can contribute to an article,
intense debates take place behind the scenes between editors,
disgruntled experts, people concerned, ideologues of a subject, idlers
who put their two cents in\... During these controversies (all available
online, which sheds light on the quarrels of interpretation and reveals
the sectarians), Wikipedia requires \"rules of etiquette\", set out on
the \"Founding Principles\" page: \"Seek consensus. Keep your cool when
the atmosphere heats up. Avoid edit wars.\" The clashes are innumerable,
even if a \"consensus search\" grid has been developed, pushing to
always resume the discussion amicably, arguing that solid, \"rational\"
content can be found. This sometimes results in long and rich articles,
where several interpretations balance each other out. Sometimes, the
desire for consensus results in interminable files. In the event of a
violent dispute, an administrator, elected by the communities of each
country, can suspend a page or ban a contributor, pending an agreement.
A very Dadaist section \"the most pitiful edit wars\" is online. One
among many others, French: the age of Arielle Dombasle. So much for the
principles. Are they really applied? Are they enough? Many precise and
learned critiques denounce amateurism and list the flagrant errors.
Daniel Garcia, from the magazine Livres Hebdo, wrote a corrosive article
on November 3, 2006: \"Open the entry on Wikipedia relating to the
Dreyfus affair. Go down to the bibliography. And there, as the first
reference, we read: Henri Dutrait-Crozon, Précis de l\'Affaire Dreyfus.
With this comment, in all letters: \"Fundamental work to consult as a
priority.\" » This 1909 book, revised in 1924 and 1938, is an
anti-Dreyfusard plea in the Action Française movement. The novelist
Pierre Assouline took up the criticism on January 9, 2007 on his blog
\"La République des Livres\". He points out that the incriminated work
is a \"gospel of nationalists\". He notes that Wikipedia, following the
intervention of the Human Rights League, has just added the mention
\"contested work\", but left it at the head of the bibliography, before
works by respected historians. Regretting the \"ambient demagogy\" that
would have everyone become an encyclopedist, Pierre Assouline exercises
this fundamental criticism: \"The question of sources is the basis of
all research, whether historical, scientific, journalistic; but
Wikipedia dilutes the source so much that it eludes it. It cannot be
repeated enough: in the field of ideas, and in particular in history,
the spirit of the reference is intrinsically linked to duration and not
to the ephemeral. However, on Wikipedia, the reference is variable
geometry: the last one who spoke is right, until the next one.\" In
2008, five journalism students from Sciences Po carried out a detailed
investigation of Wikipedia France articles. They also did a test. They
added false information to Pierre Assouline\'s profile: \"In 2001, won
the French tennis championship.\" This error soon circulated everywhere.
It called into question the very functioning of Wikipedia: thousands of
false pieces of information, outrageously laudatory or malicious notices
can pass through the encyclopedia\'s filters. Moreover, several sites
noted these persistent errors, such as the \"WikiGrill\" section of the
magazine Books en France, in which an author pointed out \"laissez-faire
as an organizational principle.\" He wonders: is it anarchy or the credo
of the liberal economy that is invoked? Noting that Wikipedia defends
\"an equal right of participation for all without regard to age,
competence or origin\", he is surprised: is not being \"without regard
to competence\" dangerous for an encyclopedia? Another example of
slippage on Wikipedia concerns Mikkel Borch-Jacobsen, co-author of The
Black Book of Psychoanalysis (Les Arènes, 2005). First presented on
Wikipedia as a reasoned critic of Freud, he suddenly found himself
treated as a \"failed analyst\" and a \"behavioral psychiatrist\".
Pro-Freudians intervened on the text, seeking to discredit it. He
protested, the false information was removed. Then reintroduced: Mikkel
Borch-Jacobsen\'s Wikipedia page has become a battlefield in a war
between Freudian and anti-Freudian associations. This is not anecdotal.
These clashes take place on a number of sensitive subjects: the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the Algerian War, prostitution, George W.
Bush\... They extend to insider quarrels: is Shakespeare the author of
his plays? Is ayahuasca a dangerous psychotropic drug? This goes on and
on. Each time, Wikipedia\'s \"cyber-firefighters\" have to warn readers:
\"The form and substance of this article must be verified\",
\"Non-neutral assertion\", \"Sources required\". At the end of their
investigation, the Sciences Po students published, at the end of 2007,
The Wikipedia Revolution (A Thousand and One Nights, preface by Pierre
Assouline). They raise several notable points: the large number of
unreliable contributors discourages experts on a subject from
intervening, which harms the quality of the articles as well as the
prioritization of information. The speed of Wikipedia, capable of
providing articles on a work that has just been released or the latest
talent in vogue, does not allow for the necessary perspective for
encyclopedic work. Rémi Mathis, 28, president of Wikimedia France, is a
curator in the prints department of the National Library of France
(BNF), rue Vivienne. He attended the Ecole nationale des chartes. He is
a good connoisseur of 17th century diplomatic history - he is a major
contributor to Wikipedia in his field of expertise. In mid-December
2011, he was reassured by the call for donations launched in France:
\"We receive donations by the thousands. Each time, people add words of
encouragement. » At the end of December, 36,000 people had donated
980,000 euros. For what projects? First, Wikipedians and the BNF will
continue their partnership. They have been tasked with proofreading and
correcting 1,400 books digitized by the library - from Nana, Zola, to
Thiers\' History of the French Revolution - before making them
accessible on the Gallica portal. The French team will also put a large
number of literary and graphic works online (Wikisource already has more
than 50,000 works) by collaborating with the Centre Pompidou, the Cluny
Museum, the Toulouse archives, etc. They will work with several
universities, in France and French-speaking Africa, in order to involve
teachers, students and researchers in writing articles. There is also
this fight for \"freedom of panorama\". \"In France, images of a public
monument such as the François Mitterrand Library or the lighting of the
Eiffel Tower are subject to copyright,\" explains Rémi Mathis. As a
result, the architect or lighting designer can request rights to
distribute photos representing their work. To promote an exemption from
this legislation, \"we launched the \"Wiki Loves Monuments\" competition
in Europe, so that Internet users can photograph historical monuments
and display them on Wikipedia Commons.\" Rémi Mathis is irritated by
criticism of Wikipedia\'s credibility. Where consensus exists, in the
fields of hard sciences, natural sciences and technology, Wikipedia
offers solid knowledge, he emphasizes. He recalls that in 2007, at the
request of Stern magazine, an independent team compared 50 articles
chosen at random from Wikipedia and Brockhaus, the great German
encyclopedia. 43 out of 50 articles were judged more exhaustive,
readable, accurate and up-to-date on Wikipedia. He adds with a pained
smile: \"Our censors would do better to help us improve the site.\" Rémi
Mathis adds that fast software like Wikiscanner now identifies the IP
addresses (which allow the computer to be identified) of contributors.
Microsoft, pharmaceutical laboratories, sects, politicians, fans have
thus been caught red-handed retyping. As for the famous \"trolls\", the
vandals and pranksters of the Net, they are now spotted more quickly
when they change George W. Bush\'s second name, Walter, to \"Wanker\",
claim that the drink Red Bull contains \"cow sperm\" or wrongly announce
the death of a star. Rémi Mathis brings the discussion to the heart of
the matter. According to him, we are witnessing a democratization of
knowledge comparable to that which followed the invention of the
printing press. At the time, the elite who read and wrote the books
accused the printing press of multiplying errors through mechanical
printing and of drowning talent in the mass of publications. For him,
the contributory encyclopedia challenges those who claim to know a
subject better individually than a group of researchers discussing among
themselves. Jean-Noël Lafargue, lecturer at Paris-VIII, former
administrator of Wikipedia, grades his students on their articles
published in Wikipedia. For him, \"we will always hear the defenders of
the \"civilized\" Internet complain, because the freedom to do and say
inspires mistrust. They will prefer censorship to disorder, will never
admit the educational value of error or of endangering established
knowledge. They do not believe in education but in training.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:921

Discreetly, he places it on a table in a corner. Immediately, several
customers, who are looking for the café\'s Wi-Fi network to go online,
see a new icon appear on their screen: \"Pirate Box, Share Freely!\"
They connect with one click, but instead of arriving at a website, they
find themselves facing a skull, accompanied by a menu that offers them
to participate in a live messaging service, to download texts and music
or to upload their own files to offer them to other connected customers.
In the messaging service, the conversation quickly goes off in all
directions. David Darts intervenes to explain how the Pirate Box works,
but the café\'s customers have already understood it, intuitively: the
box placed on the table creates around it a mini autonomous wireless
network, allowing the computers in the neighborhood to interconnect for
free, without any control. In a few minutes, the files begin to
circulate. David Darts doesn\'t know how many people are connected:
\"That\'s on purpose, the Pirate Box doesn\'t have any tools to track or
list users. If bad people \-- or the police \-- come in here and take
over my box, they\'ll never be able to know who used it.\" As he pleases
He has chosen to share musical works based on samples considered by
their authors to be royalty-free. That said, if someone uploads a file
protected by copyright, he has no objection: in this small, closed
universe, everyone does as they please, without fear of being spied on
or punished. Beyond its fun aspect, the Pirate Box was designed to give
food for thought: \"The protection of our privacy and our anonymity is
intimately linked to the preservation of our fundamental freedoms.
However, on the Internet, we accept being spied on constantly by Google
or Facebook and by state agencies. In exchange, we receive very
practical services, but, in my opinion, it is too expensive.\"
Initially, at the end of 2010, David Darts had launched into the
adventure alone: \"I had borrowed the free software Droopy, written by a
Frenchman, and I had started to adapt it to my needs.\" But, very
quickly, he realized that he needed help. He then opened a website and
launched an appeal to the free software community, which operates on the
principle of mutual aid and sharing. In a few weeks, experts voluntarily
sent him solutions and suggestions, which allowed him to complete his
work. A million visitors To check the appeal of his Pirate Box on
different audiences, David Darts conducted tests everywhere: on campus,
in bars, at parties, in parks, in the metro, in his building\... To
date, the reception has always been positive. He also distributes his
software for free via the Internet, with instructions that allow DIYers
to build their own box. True to his principles, he doesn\'t want to know
anything about them, but he guesses that there are many of them: \"In
Amazon, the server plug was on sale for \$20, but suddenly, demand
exploded, it went up to \$60. Moreover, Amazon indicates that those who
bought it also bought a box decorated with a skull\...\" In ten months,
his site has received more than a million visitors, some of whom have
joined the project. A German hacker realized that the server plug was in
fact useless, because the Pirate Box software can be installed directly
on certain routers, such as the Buffalo AirStation. At the same time, a
community of geeks has undertaken to transform a smartphone into a
Pirate Box, while another is doing the same with a laptop. In New York,
David Darts is now receiving messages urging him to start creating a
parallel network, composed of a series of interconnected Pirate Boxes:
\"My little project is part of a larger movement. Lots of people dream
of creating an alternative version of the current Internet, which they
no longer want, because it has become commercialized, centralized and
monitored from everywhere.\" Utopia Other, more politicized New Yorkers
are working to realize this utopia, with variations. Activists for a
libertarian Internet have understood that, in order to reach the general
public, they must provide ready-to-use devices. The small NGO Access
Now, which is dedicated to the defense of \"digital freedoms,\" has
undertaken to transform an ordinary Internet router into a machine for
anonymizing Internet traffic. Its technical director, Gustaf Björksten,
based in a dilapidated building in southern Manhattan, has also chosen
the Buffalo AirStation router, on which he is trying to install a
modified version of the TOR (The Onion Router) system. Developed by a
team of American and German hackers, TOR is a network of anonymous
servers that encrypt Internet data and pass it through multiple relays
to cover tracks. Direct action A few miles away, on the 17th floor of a
skyscraper in a New York business district, another team has embarked on
a more ambitious adventure: the design of a Freedom Box, which will
combine in a single box a wide range of functions to protect the
confidentiality of communications over the Internet. The project is
hosted by the Software Freedom Law Center (SFLC), a nonprofit law firm
that provides free legal services to creators of free software. SFLC
boss Eben Moglen, a long-time activist for the defense of individual
liberties, also a lawyer and professor of law at Columbia University,
understood that, when it comes to protecting citizens\' rights on the
Internet, the law is an insufficient weapon. So he decided to take
direct action: \"We are going to produce equipment that will allow each
citizen to take personal control of the protection of their privacy on
the Internet, without really knowing anything about computers.\" In
keeping with the spirit of the free software community, the team works
partly from existing programs and relies on about fifty experts, many of
them volunteers - among them, Jacob Appelbaum, co-founder of TOR, who is
also close to WikiLeaks. Eben Moglen already dreams of seeing his
company sell millions of copies on the Internet, thanks to commercial
agreements with manufacturers and distributors. That said, he knows that
his efforts will never end: \"Hackers and secret services will attack
our network, and some will succeed in compromising it. We will therefore
have to find new countermeasures each time. We will also probably have
to negotiate with certain States, accept compromises\...\" In short,
establish ourselves as a new player in the global network.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:922

New York Special Envoy - A trendy café in a neighborhood frequented by
Manhattan students. At the end of the morning, the room is crowded, but
not too noisy, because half the customers are reading or writing on
their laptops. David Darts, head of the art department at New York
University, enters discreetly, holding a school lunch box - a small
black tin box decorated with a skull. Discreetly, he places it on a
table in a corner. Immediately, several customers, who are looking for
the café\'s WiFi network to go on the Internet, see a new icon appear on
their screen: \"Pirate Box, Share Freely!\" They connect with one click,
but instead of arriving on a website, they find themselves facing a
skull, accompanied by a menu that offers them to participate in a live
messaging service, to download texts and music, or to upload their own
files to offer them to other connected customers. On the messaging
service, the conversation quickly goes off in all directions. David
Darts intervenes to explain how the Pirate Box works, but the café\'s
customers have already understood it, intuitively: the box placed on the
table creates around it a mini autonomous wireless network, allowing the
computers in the neighborhood to interconnect for free, without any
control. In a few minutes, the files start circulating. David Darts does
not know how many people are connected: \"That\'s on purpose, the Pirate
Box does not have any tools to track or list users. If malicious
people - or the police - come in here and take my box, they will never
be able to know who used it.\" He has chosen to share musical works
based on sampling (sampling) considered by their authors to be \"out of
copyright\". That said, if someone posts a file protected by copyright,
he has no objection: in this small closed universe, everyone does as
they please, without fear of being spied on or punished. Beyond its fun
aspect, the Pirate Box was designed to give food for thought: \"The
protection of our privacy and anonymity is closely linked to the
preservation of our fundamental freedoms. However, on the Internet, we
agree to be constantly spied on by Google or Facebook, and by state
agencies. In exchange, we receive very practical services, but, in my
opinion, it is too expensive.\" When you open the box, you discover an
assembly of ordinary devices costing around a hundred euros: a \"plug
server\" (peripheral management module) acting as a central unit, a WiFi
router, a USB key containing the site and files, plus a battery. The
whole thing works thanks to the free and open source Linux operating
system. Initially, at the end of 2010, David Darts had embarked on the
adventure alone: \"I had borrowed the free software Droopy, written by a
Frenchman, and I had started to adapt it to my needs. » But very
quickly, he realized that he needed help. He then opened a website and
launched an appeal to the free software community, which operates on the
principle of mutual aid and sharing. In a few weeks, experts voluntarily
sent him solutions and suggestions, which allowed him to complete his
work. To check the appeal of his Pirate Box to different audiences,
David Darts conducted tests everywhere: on campus, in bars, at parties,
in parks, in the subway, in his building\... To date, the reception has
always been positive. He also distributes his software for free on the
Internet, with instructions that allow DIYers to build their own box.
True to his principles, he wants nothing to do with them, but he guesses
that there are many of them: \"On Amazon, the server plug was on sale
for \$20 \[15 euros\], but suddenly, demand exploded, it went up to \$60
\[46 euros\]. In fact, Amazon says that those who bought it also bought
a box decorated with a skull\...\" In ten months, its site has received
more than a million visitors, some of whom have joined the project. A
German hacker realized that the server plug was actually useless,
because the Pirate Box software can be installed directly on certain
routers, such as the Buffalo AirStation. At the same time, a community
of geeks has undertaken to transform a smartphone into a Pirate Box,
while another does the same with a laptop. A third group is building a
more powerful Pirate Box, using only components whose plans are freely
available (open source). An enthusiast makes Pirate Boxes for those who
can\'t do it on their own, and sells them to them at cost price. Upon
inquiry, his name is Joseph, and he introduces himself as a 15-year-old
boy living in Virginia. He doesn\'t know if he\'ll continue for long,
because it doesn\'t bring him anything, but for him, there\'s no
question of making a business out of it: \"The main attraction of the
project is to go against the grain, outside the commercial system.\"
Joseph tests his own Pirate Box, at school, in town, at friends\'
houses: \"The young people chat like on Facebook, except that it stays
between us. We exchange photos, videos, recordings of local groups,
books like Harry Potter, and also documentation on pirate sites.\" In
New York, David Darts is now receiving messages encouraging him to start
creating a parallel network, made up of a series of interconnected
Pirate Boxes: \"My little project is part of a vast movement. Lots of
people dream of creating an alternative version of the current Internet,
which they no longer want, because it has become commercial, centralized
and monitored from everywhere. » Other, more politicized New Yorkers are
working to realize this utopia, with variations. Internet libertarian
activists have understood that to reach the general public, they must
provide ready-to-use devices. The small NGO Access Now, which is
dedicated to defending \"digital freedoms,\" has undertaken to transform
an ordinary Internet router into a machine for anonymizing Internet
traffic. Its technical director, Gustaf Björksten, based in a
dilapidated building in southern Manhattan, has also chosen the Buffalo
AirStation router, on which he is trying to install a modified version
of the TOR (The Onion Router) system. Developed by a team of American
and German hackers, TOR is a network of anonymous servers that encrypt
Internet data and pass it through several relays to cover its tracks.
Access Now hopes to launch a simple, inexpensive tool for people who
need to use the Internet discreetly---environmental and humanitarian
activists, political dissidents, trade unionists, and more---in 2012. A
few miles away, on the 17th floor of a skyscraper in a New York
financial district, another team has embarked on a more ambitious
project: the design of a Freedom Box, which will combine a wide range of
features in a single box to protect the confidentiality of Internet
communications. The project is hosted by the Software Freedom Law Center
(SFLC), a nonprofit law firm that provides free legal services to
creators of free software. SFLC CEO Eben Moglen, a longtime civil
liberties activist who is also a lawyer and law professor at Columbia
University, has learned that when it comes to protecting citizens\'
rights on the Internet, the law is not enough. So he decided to take
direct action: \"We are going to produce equipment that will allow every
citizen to take personal control of protecting their privacy on the
Internet, without really knowing anything about computers.\" To develop
its software, the Freedom Box team chose Globalscale\'s Dream Plug, a
mini-computer running Linux and costing \$150 (115 euros). The scale-up
will be done in stages, starting with encrypted messaging. Then, if all
goes as planned, starting in 2013, Freedom Box owners will be able to
browse the Internet and download files anonymously, bypass corporate
firewalls, make free encrypted calls, exchange sounds and images live
and in deferred mode, and deposit sensitive files in a safe place in
another Freedom Box. This alternative network will also make it possible
to publish documents on the Internet while remaining anonymous: everyone
will thus have their own WikiLeaks. Finally, the Freedom Boxes community
will be able to create a social network offering the same functions as
Facebook, but with a horizontal and decentralized architecture: the
personal data of its members will never be stored in a single place, and
each will retain control over it. In keeping with the spirit of the free
software community, the team works partly from existing programs, and
relies on around fifty experts, many of whom are volunteers - among
them, Jacob Appelbaum, co-founder of TOR, who is also close to
WikiLeaks. Eben Moglen already dreams of seeing his box sell millions of
copies on the Internet, thanks to commercial agreements with
manufacturers and distributors. That said, he knows that his efforts
will never end: \"Hackers and secret services will attack our network,
and some will succeed in compromising it. We will therefore have to find
new solutions each time. We will also probably have to negotiate with
certain States, accept compromises\...\" In short, to establish
ourselves as a new player on the global network.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:923

The idea of an Internet space of unlimited freedom has faded over the
years. Today, Internet users can be tracked by cookies, the snitches
left by websites and by the surveillance systems of national
authorities. Coming from the free software and hacker communities,
projects for alternative systems are multiplying. Boxes with evocative
names like Pirate Box or Freedom Box allow users to connect anonymously
to a computer network without leaving the slightest trace. Collaboration
between Internet \"tinkerers\" allows these innovations to progress
rapidly.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:924

In response to the editorial \"The fear of free software\" by journalist
Pierre Asselin Bravo, Mr. Asselin, for your editorial of January 6.
While individuals generally recognize that we owe the Internet to free
software, that the largest computers on the planet are managed by free
systems and that free software is generally less expensive, the nut is
clearly harder to crack when it comes time to get into the good habit
and adopt such a solution. For government institutions, it is an
aberration to choose solutions that are not only more expensive, but
also, above all, not free of charge. While many people around the world
recognize this, your editorial points out that the Quebec government is
really dragging its feet on this matter. Gaétan Martineau Lévis

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:925

What could the provincial government possibly be afraid of when the time
comes to open its IT market to free competition? The adoption of the
framework policy and a law on the governance and management of
information resources of public bodies, put forward by the President of
the Treasury Board, Michelle Courchesne, was supposed to promote the
opening of the public administration to free software. But in reality,
the only actions taken so far by government managers have aimed to
shield them from this desire. Starting with a decree, piloted by the
Centre des services partagés du Québec (CSPQ), aimed at allowing
over-the-counter purchases of Microsoft products, under conditions that
contradict, word for word, the framework policy. This is also evidenced
by the project for the Management of Members\' Activities (GAD) system,
piloted by the secretariat of the National Assembly. Parti Québécois MNA
Marie Malavoy thought she had convinced her peers to carry out this
project using free software, which would have been an exceptional
showcase for these tools. Several MNAs were interested in trying it out,
but once again, a Microsoft solution was chosen for them (MS Office Pro
office suite under Windows 7) before even issuing the call for tenders.
The same thing is happening in the education network, where the GRICS
Corporation, which is nevertheless part of the school boards, has also
chosen a Microsoft platform for the development of its administrative
suite. School boards that would like to use free software will therefore
have to look elsewhere. Free software allows, among other things, any
user to have access to the code to study how it works, and to modify it
according to their own needs. Everyone is also free to redistribute
copies, modify it again, etc. And the free software ecosystem is much
larger than the GNU/Linux operating system. For example, since the
beginning of the Internet, more than half of the world\'s servers have
been running on an Apache system, supported by a vast community that
operates entirely in collaborative mode where all decisions are made by
consensus. The reluctance always shown by the Quebec public
administration, despite Ms. Courchesne\'s obvious goodwill, contrasts
with what is done in other countries. In Washington, the White House
itself has contributed, on two occasions, to the code for the Drupal
software, a free and open-source content management system (CMS).
Another important contribution, the Veteran Health Administration (VHA)
has been developing for nearly 10 years a medical computerization
system, VistA, used by 1,400 institutions and seven million patients,
which won the Harvard Innovation Prize in 2006. The software is
available free of charge, by decision of the American government. The
European Commission is also investing in the development of
collaboration platforms (see: joinup.ec.europa.eu) to allow its member
countries to work on \"open source\" solutions, then shared by the
entire community and to have access to a large repertoire. Free software
will never be a miracle solution, its adoption must be done in stages,
but compared to the achievements that we see in several other public
administrations, the Quebec allergy has something of a caricature.
passelin@lesoleil.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:926

The media\'s relationship with data diverges widely on both sides of the
Atlantic. In the United States, isolated journalists began manipulating
tables of figures in the 1960s. \"Then Philip Meyer, who is a kind of
pope in the field, published Precision Journalism at the end of the
decade, a manual for using statistics for the press,\" explains Sylvain
Parasie, a lecturer at the University of Paris-Est-Marne-la-Vallée, who
has studied American data journalism at length. \"In 1971, the same
Meyer showed that the Detroit rioters in 1967 were both educated and
uneducated people, and that things were therefore more complex than
everyone thought.\" But these investigative techniques then required
intense fieldwork, often based on questionnaires. The 1980s democratized
the approach a little more, when computers became accessible. Little by
little, data journalism became a respected specialty, if not understood
and practiced by all. In 1989, Bill Dedman received the Pulitzer Prize
for investigative journalism for The Color of Money, a study that
demonstrated, based on figures collected and cross-referenced on very
explicit maps, that blacks obtained fewer bank loans than whites in
Atlanta. \"Since the 1990s,\" continues Sylvain Parasie, \"all the major
American dailies have had one or more \'computer-assisted
journalists\'\", while French editorial offices are still content with
infographics. This situation is tending to rebalance today, \"but this
type of journalism is still quite marginal in France, where it is often
practiced by personalities from the computer science, and in particular
from free software. This is an important fact here, because their
culture leads them to question the transparency of the State and thereby
to deeply question the critical spirit of journalists in the face of the
figures provided to them.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:927

The Société de transport de Montréal (STM) is giving itself a nearly \$3
million tech makeover to modernize its website and all of its electronic
communications. The STM has just awarded a three-year contract to the
digital agency TP1. Its mission will be to completely overhaul the
stm.info website. \"It\'s an old site, even though a few interactive
tools have been added since it was created in 1997,\" said Jan-Nicolas
Vanderveken, founding partner of TP1. The agency will also be
responsible for reviewing the STM\'s other technology services. Social
media, mobile technologies and design are at the top of the list of
these services. \"It\'s going to be a major project to integrate
everything, and that\'s what\'s missing,\" he continued. \"We want to
make it easier to get the information we need, no matter where we are.\"
Mr. Vanderveken assures that schedules, bus routes and geolocation will
be on the agenda for this overhaul. Codesourcelibre TP1 will also
support the STM in its transition to using open-source software. \"It\'s
less expensive, but it\'s also the best technology to take advantage of
social media,\" Mr. Vanderveken emphasized. \"These are software
programs that were born at the same time as social media. It\'s not a
question of price, it\'s more about the appropriate technology.\" The
STM usually manages its electronic communications internally or awards
contracts to subcontractors on a piecemeal basis. The first changes to
this overhaul should appear on the web in early 2012.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:928

An open space for geeks, investors, entrepreneurs and hackers in Nairobi
(Kenya), the iHub is an almost mythical place for the entire continent.
It is associated with the birth of Ushahidi, an interactive mapping
service that allows citizens to describe and geolocate the situations
they witness, by SMS or via the Web. Already used in more than 20,000
situations, it allows to draw up maps on which everyone can report the
polling stations where fraud is taking place (in Mubarak\'s Egypt for
example) as well as the points where to find help in the event of a
disaster like in Fukushima, Japan. Those who launched it, in 2008,
formed a small community accustomed to meeting in cafes and other rooms.
Until the day they wanted a roof of their own. \"We didn\'t want
Ushahidi to be the only success coming out of the country,\" Tosh,
iHub\'s \"community manager\" explained to me. "We were convinced that,
based on open source, our community could make a bigger contribution."
Unlike others who start by buying furniture as soon as they have a
space, the team first installed high-speed lines (20 megabytes per
second today). "People came quickly, which illustrates the importance of
the need." The lines were saturated and it was necessary to organize.
iHub now has more than 5,000 members who do not all have the same
status, therefore the same color. The vast majority are white. They are
the virtual community, have access to information and discussions but
not to physical spaces. The greens, nearly 250, have access to
everything for free but must renew their application every year. "We
want the doers, not the talkers," Tosh explained to me, "and we want to
see what they do, how they take advantage of the iHub." » For a
\"semi-permanent\" office and a locker, the ten reds pay 85 euros per
month, for a maximum of six months. The interest is \"to have at hand
brilliant individuals sharing the same interests, with the capacity to
develop websites, mobile applications or quality design. Many beautiful
things come out of conversations that are woven at random. The main
thing is to have direct access to the ideas that arise in this
collective space\". An essential part of the dynamic comes from the
special events organized around established companies, notable
individuals, collective activities, such as conferences, hackathons
(time-limited programming competitions on a particular subject) \... The
recipe is less simple than it seems, as everyone who sets out on the
same track discovers. Several elements seem to have played a determining
role. The first two, highlighted by Tosh himself, are government support
and the fact that a large number of Kenyans are interested in
information and communication technologies (ICTs). More important is the
pre-existence of "freelancers. It was their interaction that created the
community." The funding (in the millions of dollars over several years)
and advice provided by the Omidyar Network, a network created by the
founder of eBay, has helped immensely. I was also struck by the
existence of a research sector that shows that it is not enough to offer
broadband lines to a bunch of geeks. Finally, iHub also serves as a
magnet for a whole range of initiatives that are found on other floors
of the same building: incubators, such as Nailab for social
entrepreneurs, and m:lab for those specializing in mobile, among others.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:929

Jean-Noël de Galzain founded Wallix in 2003 to meet the IT security
needs of companies. With a growth of 150% per year, the company has
become the French leader in the field of management and identification
of access to computer networks. What is Wallix\'s field of activity? The
security of computer systems essentially concerns three areas: first
antiviruses, then firewalls (protection) and antispams (filtering), and
finally identity and access management. It is this last part that we
take care of. We publish software that allows companies to manage all
the risks linked to the increase in the number of users of their
networks, who thus access all their IT resources. This is also the case
when a company entrusts the administration of its IT equipment or
network to an external service provider. The risk is that certain people
use this information for their own benefit. We see it every day! One of
the most famous cases is that of Jerôme Kerviel. Initially, at Société
Générale, he was an IT controller. He checked how far traders went in
their commitments. When he became a trader himself, he kept his codes
and his rights on the network. As a result, he had become judge and
jury, and no one had control over what he was doing. Another example:
the WikiLeaks affair. Once again, it was an employee who used his right
of access to retrieve confidential information that he did not have the
right to consult and even less to distribute. What technologies can
prevent this? Our software allows, among other things, to control who
has access to what and who has been on the network recently. We can then
activate or deactivate the codes, or even restrict the scope of access.
In 2006, we developed a similar system that has been downloaded several
million times. But our flagship product is Wab, a solution that allows
both this type of management and traceability of any intrusion, by means
of regular screenshots and the possibility of reviewing everything that
has been done on video. Wab is continuously evolving and we are
constantly investing in new features. We have signed agreements with
research laboratories such as those at Inria or the Epita engineering
school to always be up to date and strengthen our offer. Who are your
customers? I founded this company in 2003. At that time, there was a
real need for IT security on the market. Banks and multinationals wanted
to ensure that their information was safe everywhere in the world. We
were able to secure the subsidiaries of large groups located in
sensitive countries - Burma, Iran, South Asia, Libya, Syria and Latin
America. These are countries where network security is not reliable, and
where the network itself is of poor quality. These subsidiaries are
located in extreme conditions, where it is very hot or very cold, where
there can be sandstorms and\... political instability. You have to be
able to intervene from afar, while maintaining the best possible quality
of service. We have set up a team of twelve people to monitor these
sites remotely. We were lucky that Total was the first major company to
trust us, to secure its sites in 70 countries. They chose us at that
time, because we had the technology best suited to their requirements.
It is a group of colossal importance, working for them was very
demanding and led us to become more professional. Today, in addition to
Total, we have 120 major customers, 50% of which are in banking and the
public sector. But we also have local authorities and SMEs as customers.
How do you see the future of Wallix in the current economic context? Our
goal is to go from 3.5 million euros in revenue today to 50 million in
the next six years. We are already leaders in France, but we have just
raised 2 million euros to become number one in Europe. Then, we will go
to China and the United States. We are not very worried, the market we
are in is growing very strongly. Not a week, or even two days, goes by
without a security problem appearing. Before, IT was confidential,
managed by IT specialists; now, it is omnipresent and needs to be
protected. Smartphones, \"cloud computing\", which consists of a company
storing its data on external servers, all this is becoming strategic and
critical. However, companies do not have enough resources and must deal
with this generalized interconnection. It is difficult to know who has
access to what, when and how. A recent study by Symantec shows that
cybercrime costs them an average of 1.7 billion euros per year! 90% of
them are expected to experience at least one incident that will cost
them money and time. So we could have many more customers! One hundred
and twenty is not enough. We are in a race against time to gain market
share in this sector. p

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:930

1995 Jean-Noël de Galzain, born in 1971, founded Best of Media, a
company specializing in multimedia publishing. 1999 Founding of Aurora
Groupe, one of the French pioneers of free software. 2003 Resale of
Aurora to the Business & Decisions group and founding of Wallix, of
which he is still president.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:931

Senegalese, Lebanese and French, Karim Sy, a computer scientist trained
in Montreal, launched his first company at 19. Today, he runs
Jokkolabs.net, in Dakar (Senegal), one of those curious spaces from
which an essential part of the Africa of tomorrow could emerge\... the
very one that The Economist declares is the continent on the rise.
Jokkolabs is a collaborative workspace (coworking). There are nearly 800
in the world, including 16 in Africa. A \"coworking visa\" allows
members of 200 of them to work freely at each other\'s homes. \"We are
part of the contributory economy,\" explains Karim Sy. A somewhat
idealistic model that allows us to be both global and local. » It draws
inspiration from the most beautiful African traditions, such as Ubuntu,
the interdependence dear to the South African Desmond Tutu, and the open
source spirit, betting on information technologies and collective
intelligence. Jokkolabs defines itself as \"a center for technological
and social innovations that also works on the development of the
individual, a think tank that does not rely on experts, but on the
experience of people.\" In Africa, such meeting places are essential.
But we must distinguish coworking spaces from incubators, preferred by
institutions and investors who finance the development of start-ups
there. In both, we find technical facilities and the possibility of
meeting peers. But in the incubators that I have seen, each company has
its office where it locks itself away to secretly develop its project.
The common areas are only used for \"networking\" during special events.
\"The network is made up of weak links, they must be transformed into
strong links. My role is to sense the candidates\' disposition to
encourage the community to blossom,\" Karim Sy recalls. This is the part
of the Silicon Valley recipe that cannot be recreated institutionally.
Money and brains can be brought together, but how can individuals build
connections? During a meeting organized by Karim Sy with about fifteen
bloggers in the Jokkolabs offices, a developer expressed his desire to
be an entrepreneur: \"We must live according to the market\'s potential.
If we don\'t have motivation, it doesn\'t work.\" But \"he must also be
interested in what is happening around him,\" replied Soukaye Dieng, a
midwife in a white boubou who is fighting for access to demographic
data, because this would allow civil society to participate in the
implementation of better birth rate and health policies. \"We must
therefore improve relations between developers and communities, and get
them to work together,\" she believes.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:932

So, the capital of France is becoming encumbered with an additional
category of motor vehicles. Three thousand electric cars will gradually
be freely available to people who subscribe to the so-called Autolib\'
service. They will be able to borrow a car from a station and drop it
off at any other station in the forty or so neighboring municipalities
of Paris participating in the system. This new system was designed in
the wake of Vélib\', bicycles accessible to all. It would allow
Parisians to no longer own a car while traveling in a non-polluting way.
But if environmentalists applauded the launch of Vélib\' with both
hands, they strongly criticize Autolib\'. First, the environmental
impact of the electric car does not seem positive, since the production
of electricity needed to move it is always polluting, whether it is
fossil or nuclear - without forgetting, of course, the mass of metals
and plastic that the car itself represents. In fact, Friends of the
Earth point out that instead of pushing for \"reducing energy
consumption\", Autolib\' \"encourages the deployment of an industrial
sector of electric cars\". Let\'s imagine that this is successful. The
number of cars and vans in the world exceeds 1.3 billion vehicles. Who
can believe that their replacement by so many electric vehicles would
really improve the ecological impact of this fleet? The real issue is to
reduce the number of vehicles. From this point of view, is Autolib\' so
negative? \"We want to make Parisians realize that the most important
thing is not the ownership but the use of a car\", says Annick Lepetit,
deputy mayor of Paris. To which Europe Ecologie-Les Verts responds that
\"car sharing has existed in Paris for several years\" in the form of
numerous small rental companies and carpooling associations. Why favor a
firm - in this case Bolloré, the parent company of Autolib\'? Because in
shared mobility, as much as the vehicle counts the computer network that
connects users and means of transport. With Autolib\', control of the
network is held by a company, whereas it could be managed by the
community, in the manner of Wikipedia and free software, as suggested by
Yves Heuillard on the site Ddmagazine.com. Car sharing will be
cooperative or it will not be.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:933

If the Quebec government is looking to save money with its office
suites, it can always consult the many experiments conducted in several
countries with OpenOffice. A project carried out by the Finnish Ministry
of Justice, on more than 10,000 workstations, saved \$4.5 million, or
more than half the bill. A study carried out in 2010 on this project,
started in 2003, concluded that the transition to OpenOffice resulted in
substantial savings: costs of \$2.1 million with OpenOffice compared to
\$6.7 million with MS Office. It also had beneficial effects in terms of
sovereignty, governance and reduced dependence on a single supplier,
underlines the author of the study. More recently, in France, the Paris
administrative region (Île-de-France) announced that it would offer a
new version of the LibreOffice suite to high school students, their
parents, their teachers, and administrative staff, nearly a million
users, for the 2012 school year. All will receive a USB key allowing
access to the software. LibreOffice is an office suite derived from
OpenOffice, and the version offered is called LooL (Libre Office On
Line). This is an online software, like Google Apps, which will be
hosted by \"Marguerite\", a cloud computing project serving students and
researchers in the Paris administrative region. France is undoubtedly,
along with Brazil, the country with the longest experience of free
software. Several services have been completely converted. This is the
case of the National Gendarmerie, which includes the police force and
the military police, i.e. more than 100,000 employees. In 2005, the
organization began migrating from Microsoft Office to OpenOffice, for
70,000 workstations. In 2008, the Gendarmerie then began replacing
Windows operating systems with a GNU/Linux system, targeting 90,000
workstations by 2015. In 2010, Lieutenant-Colonel Xavier Guimard
estimated that the Gendarmerie had reduced its IT spending by more than
50%, without losing functionality. Savings in licensing and maintenance
costs were estimated at €50 million (CAD\$68 million) for the period
2004-2009. Munich In Germany, the city of Munich also began converting
the municipal administration\'s approximately 15,000 workstations to the
Linux platform in 2003. The city even created its own operating system:
LiMux. The much more ambitious migration, however, ran into problems
along the way. Munich now has 3,000 workstations running LiMux, but all
users use the Firefox browser, the Thunderbird email client and the
OpenOffice suite. Furthermore, the Finnish study identified a key
condition for such transitions to be successful. They must be initiated
and supported at the highest level. In the case of Munich, the city
council and the mayor of the city were behind the project. In this case,
the project was less about reducing costs than about freeing itself from
Microsoft\'s proprietary formats.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:934

Ignoring a moratorium that the Treasury Board has just decreed on all
renewals of Microsoft licenses in the Quebec government, the National
Assembly is moving forward with a call for tenders, exclusively reserved
for Microsoft, to equip all MNAs and their staff. As of April 2014,
Microsoft is ceasing all support for the Windows XP system. The Office
of the Chief Information Officer (CIO) at the Treasury Board estimates
that 400,000 workstations will have to \"migrate\" to more recent
versions of Windows and Microsoft Office. At \$2,000 per workstation,
the expense is estimated at nearly \$800 million. Given the magnitude of
these costs, the CIO asked all departments and agencies in early
November to suspend all migration operations until next February. In the
meantime, an interdepartmental working group is to propose ways to
achieve savings. Last September, the National Assembly\'s Financial
Resources, Procurement and Verification Directorate issued a public call
for tenders for a \"Members\' Activity Management\" (GAD) system to
computerize the management of constituency cases and subsidies. The
system is to serve 500 people, including the 125 MNAs and their support
staff. But last week, the National Assembly published an addendum
specifying that \"the technological orientation chosen is MS Office Pro
2010 and Windows 7.\" The deadline for the call for tenders was then
extended to December 14. Different platforms Quebec is therefore
excluding from the call for tenders any supplier whose products use a
different platform, such as Apple or Linux, as well as proposals based
on OpenOffice suites, which nevertheless work very well on the Windows
platform. The Parti Québécois MNA for Taillon, Marie Malavoy, the
official opposition\'s spokesperson for research and development, says
she is shocked by the news. In fact, she herself had proposed, in June
2010, to the Bureau of the National Assembly to carry out a pilot
project in free software. \"I am very troubled, because I had understood
that we were going to keep Microsoft for the administration, and make
this GAD the pilot project.\" She cites the report published by the
heads of IT services, who propose \"that this project \[Management of
Members\' Activities\] become the pilot project, if the solution deemed
the best belongs to the free software world\...\" But everything hinges
on this last \"if\". Indeed, even if the framework policy on the
governance and management of information resources, implemented by the
Treasury Board, provides for the analysis of the free software option,
this analysis is done BEFORE the call for tenders. \"I thought we were
giving free software a chance to assert itself in the process,\"
observes Ms. Malavoy, \"but if you rule it out before you even start, it
doesn\'t make any sense anymore!\" During her discussions with the
Bureau of the National Assembly, she adds, it was concluded that the GAD
system would lend itself well to a pilot project for free software.
\"You need a limited, homogeneous clientele; there are only 125 members,
not 5,000.\" There are members who were more than happy to take the
step, continues the member, especially since free software can be
modified to adapt it to the specific needs of certain constituencies.
\"I don\'t know how this decision was made, I don\'t understand what
could have happened.\" passelin@lesoleil.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:935

SHERBROOKE - The president of Révolution Linux, Benoît des Ligneris, has
just been elected president of APELL, the Professional Association of
Free Software Companies. During their annual general meeting in
Montreal, APELL members chose to entrust the Sherbrooke resident with
the presidency of their new board of directors. The six other members of
the board of directors are the first vice-president, Rida Benjelloun,
president of Doculi; the second vice-president, Cyrille Béraultbre,
president of Savoir-Faire Linux; and the vice-president of Finance,
Serge Martel, president of Gestion Ressources. They will be joined by
Sylvain Boily, president of PR; François Beauregard and Stéphan
Champagne. During this meeting, APELL members considered the
interpretation that should be made of decree 1111-2011, which allows,
without a call for tenders, the renewal of some software from large
companies. The digital heritage to which free software contributes is
booming throughout the world and in Quebec in particular, following the
adoption of Bill 133 and the framework policy on the management of
information resources. In this context, the general assembly decided on
the priorities of the new board of directors for the year 2011-2012,
namely communication, transparency and structure.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:936

\"On the Internet, information and a rumor are equal,\" says Ignacio
Ramonet in an interview with Libération.fr. With these words, the then
director of Le Monde diplomatique comments on the famous sex and
politics affair of Bill Clinton and Monica Lewinsky who did \"very
inappropriate\" things in the Oval Office of the White House. It was
1999, at the very beginning of the Web explosion. The Monica story was
circulating on the Web, a phenomenon that the Libération website hailed
as \"the founding event of a new media.\" But who, today, remembers this
prophetic analysis? No one, except the database of servers in the
basement of the National Library of France (BNF), in Paris. For two
years, the web pages of all domain names preceded by \"www\" and ending
in \".fr\" have been saved here, or nearly two million sites to date.
Not just once, but twice, for security reasons, in order to comply with
the Dadvsi law (Copyright and related rights in the information
society). Passed in 2006, it extended the scope of legal deposit to
digital publications, bringing the Web under the national heritage code.
The Web is therefore recorded and preserved in the same way as
Gutenberg\'s first printed Bible, a children\'s coloring book, Anish
Kapoor\'s prints, 320,000 issues of periodicals per year, from Le Monde
to the Journal du Gers, including freebies, the fifty-three editions of
Ouest-France, comics and classified ads\... All legal deposit services
are affected by this new archiving activity. In the periodical sorting
room, Arnaud Avril watches over the robot that photographs the home page
of 76 press sites between two packages stuffed with newspapers to be
sorted. Collected daily, this selection of sites aims to represent \"a
spirit of the times,\" explains Gildas Illien, head of digital legal
deposit. That of the French person who, when he gets up in the morning,
checks the news of the day on his computer or phone.\" An obligation
created by François I Selection? Legal deposit is nevertheless supposed
to collect without discrimination any document distributed, produced or
published on the national territory. The enterprise, begun in 1537 by
royal order of François I, has been able to integrate new media (cinema,
audiovisual documents). Until the transition to digital disrupted the
legal deposit landscape. New books are still transported by entire carts
to the floors of the Tour des Temps, one of the four of the BNF (with
Numbers, Letters and Laws), where the legal deposit is located. But the
paper work, this physical, stable medium, added to the national
bibliography after description of its metadata (author, publisher,
themes, etc.) now coexists with the immaterial. Make way for flows,
cohorts of formats and computer codes, flash, plugins and javascript - a
whole complex, fleeting and constantly evolving environment that must be
recorded. \"Danaids\' barrel\", \"Sisyphus\": these expressions are
constantly on the lips of those who, at the BNF, are responsible for
this unprecedented mission. But \"we must imagine Sisyphus happy\",
assures Christine Genin, quoting Albert Camus. A specialist in
contemporary French literature, she has one foot in both worlds - paper
and digital -, like 79 of her colleagues in the Collections Department
associated with the legal deposit of the BNF Web. These librarians sort
the sites that will be sucked up during \"targeted collections\", more
systematic and therefore more complete than the so-called \"broad\"
collection, conducted once a year. In total, 20,000 sites deemed to be
of general interest are thus the object of special attention and an
exhaustive collection. Thus, Zazieweb.fr, a vast community of e-readers
brimming with resources on contemporary literature, active for twelve
years, was fully archived before its closure in 2009. An example among
others of the interest in the legal deposit of digital. However, to
carry out this unprecedented mission, it was necessary to overcome
unprecedented technical problems. \"We will never be able to preserve
more than portions of this living artifact that is the Web,\" warns
Gildas Illien\'s predecessor, Julien Masanès, who led the first
experiments in digital recording at the BNF and who now heads the
Internet Memory foundation, a private structure engaged in the same
archiving work. He explains: the URL, this address that we type in the
bar of our browser, gives access to an infinite number of web pages
nested one inside the other. To record them, engineers invented \"click
simulators\" called \"crawlers\". Seven of them are at work in the icy
engine room of the BNF, cubes measuring no more than 50 cm by 50 cm. A
sort of harvesting robot similar to those of search engines, they
navigate the tricky twists and turns of the Web to index the desired
sites, avoiding as best they can the \"noise\": advertisements,
calendars, statistics, and other dynamically generated web pages, ad
nauseam. And all this while respecting certain rules of decorum, the
main one being not to over-solicit the servers visited, under penalty of
being perceived as attackers, like Anonymous. The result of their
harvest: to date, 13 billion files indexed and stored in rows of secure
server bays. But the work does not stop there. For a given site, it is
not only a collection of pages that must be archived, but also the way
in which one moves between these pages. We must \"be able to restore not
only the flow, but especially the publication methods,\" explains Jérôme
Thièvre, an engineer in the legal deposit section of the Web at the
Institut national de l\'audiovisuel, in Bry-sur-Marne (Val-de-Marne).
This department of the INA, headed by Claude Mussou, has a special
mission: to archive the sites produced by the audiovisual world. Jérôme
Thièvre shows the black screen where lines in green characters scroll by
at high speed, evidence of the ongoing collection of the 8,000 indexed
sites, including those of Radio France, France Télévisions, many
web-TVs, or even web-documentaries, or even blogs of TV or radio
journalists\... 8,000 sites is a lot, but still less than the 2 million
that the BNF must capture. As a result, the INA\'s collection is more
complete. Some home pages are even harvested every two hours by these
crawlers which, like in Pixar films, have names. At the INA, Crocket
scours the \"deep Web\", these pages which are hidden behind drop-down
menus and which only appear when a mouse hovers over them (such as the
TV programmes on the France2.fr home page). And Webcollecte takes care
of the rest. At the BNF, Heritrix does the work: software developed in
open source by the Internet Archive organisation. Twenty-four hours a
day, Crocket, Webcollecte and Heritrix collect millions of pages which
can then be explored using software which allows, from a URL, to go back
in time to sites which have disappeared or changed. A great feat. At the
service, for the time being, of the happy few. Only a few certified
researchers - a hundred per month - can consult the archives of the INA
and the BNF\... at the BNF. Even regional partner libraries do not have
access to it. However, anyone could explore this database from home. In
2000, the Internet Archive developed a freely accessible online
application, Wayback Machine, which allows users to benefit from the
fruits of the crawlers\' work. The reasons for restricted access are
legal and political. \"Libraries have been far too timid to defend open
access,\" insists Julien Masanès, \"so the rules of the game have been
set by others \[the music industry, editor\'s note\], and for other
types of content. However, these archives will only be important if they
are on the Internet.\" Therefore, an Internet user who comes across a
\"404 Not Found\", the detestable mark of an untraceable address, would
be immediately redirected to the disappeared archive. Are libraries
cautious? Cautious with the law, like the State, the National Commission
for Information Technology and Civil Liberties (CNIL) and the publishers
who refuse, in France, its opening. However, the preservation of this
digital cultural fund more evanescent than ever would imply thinking
about exemptions, believe some librarians. As for the International
Internet Preservation Consortium (IIPC) where the BNF and the INA play a
leading role alongside the Internet Archive, it is struggling to become
the lobby it should be. If it facilitates exchanges between
institutions, it comes up against the incompatibility of the different
national laws protecting copyright, the question of respect for privacy
and personal data being moreover waved like a scarecrow. Means in the
private domain But all is not decided. \"We have been waiting for the
decree \[of the Dadvsi law, editor\'s note\] for five years,\" sighs
Gildas Illien. Currently on the desk of the Council of State, \"it is
supposed to specify the terms of public access to the archives. And also
the scope of the \"French Web\"\". Because the 2 million sites placed
within the scope of the BNF only represent a third of the addresses in
France. Would it be possible for public players in digital archiving to
go further, and manage even larger masses of data? For the time being,
it is clear that the expertise and the means are in the private domain.
Search engines and social networks \"accumulate a colossal mass of
information, in the most total opacity. We do not realize what an
enormous privilege it is to have a giant index like Google\", says
Julien Masanès, visibly annoyed. \"It\'s as if Areva were running CERN
\[the European Organization for Nuclear Research, editor\'s note\].
Imagine all the research on particles depending on a private company.\"
Let\'s imagine what a mine for the analysis of social relations, images
of the world, adolescent cultures, or even representations of the normal
and the pathological could constitute the archives of Facebook,
Skyblogs, or Doctissimo forums, provided that the anonymity of the data
is protected. \"We do not have the vocation to become a cemetery,\"
summarizes Jean-Michel Rodes, director of collections at the INA. We are
at the very beginning of this media. It is up to us to build a science
of the Web and to imagine the uses of tomorrow.\" (1) The law specifies
that \"signs, signals, writings, images, sounds or messages of any
nature that are the subject of communication to the public by electronic
means are subject to legal deposit.\" Photos Patrick Tourneb&OElig;uf
Tendance floue

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:937

It took time, but here it is: there is an alternative to Facebook. The
baby is called Diaspora, it aims to be an alter-Facebook social network
that is very strict on privacy and has just opened its \"alpha\" version
to the public for testing. In April 2010, the four fathers of Diaspora,
New York computer science students, announced the creation of a
completely transparent, open-source and decentralized system to give
Internet users control over their personal data online. For over a year,
the four founders worked hard on the security of the site, after hackers
reported a whole series of flaws that could allow them to hack user
accounts. In October 2011, short of funds, they launched an appeal for
donations to continue developing the project. A few days later, one of
the members of the quartet committed suicide while the \"alpha\" version
was almost ready\... Since this week, it has been open to everyone.
Anyone can now create an account on Joindiaspora.com and form their own
opinion on the baby network. \"Tags\". Let\'s say it right away: it\'s
not ready yet. The French version is grammatically shaky and it\'s
complicated to use. But we can already see and appreciate a few points
that could help the site make a small place for itself in the sun. When
you sign up, the site leaps with enthusiasm: \"Well, hello! The Diaspora
community is happy to have you on board!\" So, we\'re very happy too,
even if we don\'t yet see the shadow of the beginning of a community.
The truth is cruel: on this network, we don\'t have friends. To populate
the timeline, Diaspora suggests \"following\" \"tags\". The vocabulary
and idea are clearly borrowed from Twitter: by subscribing to keywords
like \"#cat\", \"#zelda\" or \"#pancakes\", for example, you are sure to
be kept informed of all the messages from Diaspora users on said
subjects. You still take care to find one or two friends, either by
inviting them by email or by importing your Facebook address book.
Contacts are grouped into \"aspects\", the equivalent of groups of
friends on Facebook or circles on Google +. By default, you have a
\"Family\", \"Friends\", \"Work\", \"Acquaintances\" aspect\... Each
message that you post on Diaspora can thus be intended for a specific
circle of people or posted in \"public\" mode. Barbarian. First good
point: only messages posted in \"public\" can be \"reshared\" by a
contact on their own profile. The original sender is thus assured that,
unlike Facebook, his message will not become visible to more people than
he initially wanted. Otherwise, as on Facebook, you can \"like\" a
message, comment on it. As on Facebook, you are informed in real time as
soon as a contact interacts with content that you have posted and, as on
Facebook, you can send private messages. In the confidentiality
parameters, however, we note the effort not to fall into the pitfalls of
the network with 800 million members: an option allows you to download
an XML file containing the data that Diaspora stores on us. The next
step will probably be to offer the same possibility in a less barbaric
format for the average user. The experience is interesting but, for lack
of friends, for lack of content, we soon have little left to test. See
you in six months.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:938

TALENDFree software publisherCreated: 2006 \"We started our business in
2008,\" explains Bertrand Diard, CEO of Talend, \"since then, we have
doubled our turnover every year.\" The entrepreneur, based in
California, co-founded Talend, a specialist in the management and
integration of \"free\" data, five years ago. The company, which has
kept its French headquarters, carries out 45% of its business in the
United States compared to 50% in Europe. Talend publishes \"free\"
software, as opposed to Microsoft\'s proprietary software, for example.
The particularity of free software is that it offers opportunities in
terms of collaboration and therefore data aggregation. After four rounds
of funding, including a \$34 million fundraising from the American fund
Silver Lake and historical investors, Talend could consider an IPO. A.
DE G.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:939

Free software advocates describe as \"dubious\" and \"probably
questionable\" a recent decree on the government\'s acquisition of
computer software. Decree 1111-2011, adopted by the Council of Ministers
on November 2, allows the government, for three years, to bypass the
call for tenders procedure for the upgrading and updating of its 373,000
computer workstations. The latter are almost entirely equipped with the
Windows XP operating system and the Microsoft Office 2002/2003 office
suite. Over a period of seven years, updating these workstations will
cost an average of \$2,000 per workstation. The total bill should be
around \$800 million, according to the Treasury Board itself. \"The
decree is a real step backwards compared to Bill 133, which was passed a
few months ago,\" lamented Cyrille Béraud, president of the Professional
Association of Free Software Companies (APELL). The law requires the
government to consider the free software option. But there is a double
discourse. We always give in to the proprietary software lobby.\" That
said, the president of APPEL does not plan to challenge this text in
court. \"Our lawyer must study the decree, but we are in collaboration
mode with the government,\" he specified. \"Substantial savings\" Even
if he is not able to quantify the \"substantial savings\" that a switch
to free software would allow, Mr. Béraud believes that Quebec would do
well to take inspiration from France. \"This year, there are 500,000
workstations in the French government that have switched to free
software,\" he reported. \"Everywhere in the world, it has allowed
savings.\" Yesterday, it was the QuébecLeaks website, inspired by
WikiLeaks, that made public the decree \"kept secret by the government\"
of Quebec. \"The definition of what is secret does not only concern what
is decreed as being secret, but also what is sought to be kept away from
the public eye,\" a QuébecLeaks representative explained to the Journal
by email. The spokesperson for the President of the Treasury Board did
not return the Journal\'s call.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:940

Synthetic biology is a bit like Frankenstein 2.0. A story of a demiurge
that gives you the shivers, where it is sometimes difficult to
distinguish the true from the plausible, the false from the not yet
arrived, science from fiction. Almost two centuries after being imagined
by Mary Shelley, the famous doctor is no longer alone, biologists are
now legion to want to remake life from its elementary bricks. Some are
getting close to the goal. Their creatures will not have a voice in the
chapter to moan about having been (counter)made: there is no question
today of creating a monster endowed with speech. The ambition, already
excessive, is to manufacture elementary life, in the form of cells
equipped with a DNA whose sequence will have been manufactured by man
and which will be able to reproduce to, at will, manufacture biofuels,
medicines or raw materials, clean up the environment, etc. What are
these promises worth? Are they credible and, if so, should we let them
be? Have we measured the threats, the possible excesses, the ethical
issues? These questions are at the heart of the fascinating work of the
philosopher of science and technology (Paris-I) Bernadette
Bensaude-Vincent and the journalist Dorothée Benoit-Browaeys, general
delegate of VivAgora, an association for citizen engagement in the
governance of technologies. Their book asks: where is synthetic biology
going, this emerging discipline which, by combining the latest
industrial tools developed to decipher genomes, proposes to reconstruct
them de novo? \"Oecological\" approach They show that this simplistic
presentation - sometimes simplified by the standard-bearers of the
discipline, such as the American Craig Venter - masks a plurality of
approaches and objectives. Should we start with elementary bricks and
stack them until we recreate life (bottom up)? Should we take
inspiration from what already works (top down), remove the superfluous
step by step, before \"accessorizing\" it? Should we favor a middle
voice? There are enough teams, enthusiasm and funding to cover the
entire spectrum - with the notable exception, the authors emphasize, of
an \"ecological\" approach, capable of understanding synthetic living
things in their interactions with the ecosystem in which they will be
immersed. On this emerging \"biocapitalism\", between industrial genius
and tinkering, Bernadette Bensaude-Vincent and Dorothée Benoit-Browaeys
avoid any simplification. They emphasize that the open approach inspired
by the world of free software advocated by the promoters of
interoperable BioBricksTM can mask issues of standardization. They note
that artificializing life makes it easier to \"patent\", and that this
has not escaped the attention of synthetic biologists, who are also
often entrepreneurs. As diverse as they may be, all these actors have in
common that they have armed themselves from the outset with regard to
ethical questions. Surrounding themselves with philosophers or
sociologists, launching calls for vigilance themselves, they lull it to
sleep and confuse governance and ethics, never getting to the bottom of
things, the authors regret. For them, \"the creation of technomimetic
living things has as its horizon the humanization of nature, so that man
can contemplate his own image in the world around him\". Between the
biologist-Narcissus-Frankenstein and his reflection, they suggest that
the general public get involved. With their book as a viaticum, the
dialogue will only be more fertile.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:941

Less than a year after opening the door to open source software with the
Framework Policy on Information Resource Management, the Council of
Ministers has just adopted a decree that protects the exclusivity of
large corporations for certain contracts. The policy, tabled in 2010 by
Treasury Board President Michelle Courchesne, stipulates: \"Public
bodies will be asked to consider open source software when replacing,
acquiring, renewing or upgrading software.\" It is nevertheless possible
for departments to avoid the call for tenders process, provided they
conduct \"serious and documented research\" to demonstrate that a single
product meets their needs. According to the new decree, \"this research
is not relevant in the context of renewing a software maintenance
contract, upgrading, acquiring additional licenses or acquiring
additional software in a set of integrated software.\" In other words,
the framework policy asks departments to consider open source software
for these purchases, and the decree authorizes them to disregard it\...
About ten suppliers are identified in the text, including Microsoft,
Oracle, IBM and Adobe, who can thus sell their products over the counter
to the government. Daniel Gilbert, vice-president of material resources
and means of communication at the Centre de services partagés du Québec
(CSPQ), assures that this decree essentially targets exceptional
situations, such as when additional needs arise during the fiscal year.
Judgment To understand this imbroglio, we must recall the judgment,
rendered in June 2010, which declared illegal a purchase without a call
for tender, by the Régie des rentes, of hundreds of Microsoft operating
systems and office suites. The judgment was based on the distinction
between \"upgrade\" and \"migration\" of a computer system. If we
confuse the two, \"everything would become an upgrade, making the rule
of the call for tenders inapplicable,\" wrote Judge Denis Jacques at the
time. The decree responds in some way to the judgment, by stating that
the purchase without a call for tender of a new version of software is
possible, provided that the two versions are separated by a maximum of
three years. Beyond that, any purchase must be the subject of a public
notice of intent, and the \"serious and documented research\" must be
validated by an objective expert. These conditions did not exist before
the judgment, Mr. Gilbert emphasizes. \"The decree will be useful to us
in ensuring the continuity of a licensing contract, by allowing the
renewal of 25% of licenses per year or 50% over three years.\" The
decree allows for the signing of three-year agreements, which
corresponds to an agreement that the CSPQ wanted to negotiate in 2010
with Microsoft, in the wake of the judgment rendered for the Régie des
rentes. \"Things are not moving forward,\" notes Cyrille Béraud,
president of the Association professionnelle des entreprises en
logiciellibres (APELL) and the company Savoir-Faire Linux. The problem
is that the public administration considers free software as a product,
when it is above all a way of doing IT. The State would have every
interest in taking control of its information system by favoring the use
of free software and recourse to a competitive market instead of
monopolies.\" Despite the opening announced by the framework policy, he
deplores, ministries are abandoning promising free software projects,
and the Round Table that was to bring together representatives of APELL
and representatives of ministries and organizations has still not seen
the light of day. passelin@lesoleil.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:942

NEW YORK - Jeffrey Marx isn\'t ready to applaud Michael Bloomberg, far
from it. But he\'s convinced that the New York mayor\'s decision to
deploy hundreds of police officers to clear Zuccotti Square, the
symbolic encampment of the Occupy Wall Street movement, will ultimately
work in favor of the \"outraged.\" \"Every time the police have used
force against us, our movement has gained new activists,\" said the
34-year-old receptionist, who himself joined the movement after the
arrest of some 700 protesters on the Brooklyn Bridge on Oct. 1. \"People
know it\'s not right,\" he added, referring to the police raid, carried
out under cover of darkness, which led to the dismantling of the
Zuccotti Square encampment and the arrest of nearly 200 people,
including at least five journalists. Time will tell whether Jeffrey Marx
is right. In the meantime, Mayor Bloomberg has won a round against the
Zuccotti Park protesters. They will be able to continue protesting in
the square located a stone\'s throw from Wall Street, but they will no
longer be able to camp there, a New York judge confirmed late this
afternoon. \"They \[the protesters\] have failed to demonstrate that
remaining in Zuccotti Square falls within the scope of the First
Amendment\" of the American Constitution on freedom of expression, Judge
Michael Stallman wrote in his decision. The judge added that the
\"tents, equipment, generators and installations\" of the Occupy Wall
Street activists go against \"the rights and duties of the owner to
maintain the park, or the rights of people who would like to enjoy this
space in complete safety.\" Shortly after this verdict, the New York
police allowed the protesters to return to Zuccotti Square, which is
owned by the real estate company Brookfield Properties. \"Zuccotti
Square will remain open for all who wish to enjoy it, as long as they
respect the park\'s rules,\" Bloomberg said in a statement. Earlier in
the day, the New York mayor justified the eviction of the protesters by
citing \"safety and health\" reasons. \"The majority of the protesters
were peaceful and responsible. But a minority were not, and as the
number of protesters grew, it created an intolerable situation,\"
Bloomberg said at a press conference. Hundreds of protesters celebrated
the reopening of Zuccotti Square, which they had occupied since
September 17. In the early evening, the sound of drums could be heard
again, as well as the chanting of slogans. \"You can\'t oust an idea,\"
was one of the chants. However, all the protesters vigorously denounced
the NYPD raid, calling it \"brutal\" or \"illegal.\" "They barely gave
us 10 minutes to leave the park peacefully," said Tiffany Rose, a
27-year-old from New Jersey who camped out for 44 days in Zuccotti
Square. "Within 10 minutes, they started using pepper spray, stun
grenades, tear gas, and their batons." "It was so clean and organized
here," she said. "We had our kitchen, our library with 500 books, our
media center, our clinic. We had started to build a real community and
they destroyed it all in a matter of hours." Jason LaTour, a 25-year-old
New Yorker who worked in the camp's kitchen, painted a less rosy picture
of Zuccotti Square. \"The place had become difficult to manage. More and
more people were coming here to drink or do drugs. It created an
unstable, dangerous climate. In a sense, the evacuation will perhaps
allow the movement to be restarted on a healthier basis,\" he said.
Deborah Goodman, a 50-year-old retired secretary, shares the same hope.
\"Every time Mayor Bloomberg tries to crush us, we come out stronger,\"
she said. \"After Occupy,\" the editorial by Ariane Krol, on page A30.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:943

New York - Jeffrey Marx is not ready to applaud Michael Bloomberg, far
from it. But he is convinced that the decision of the mayor of New York
to deploy hundreds of police officers to evacuate Zuccotti Square,
symbolic encampment of the Occupy Wall Street movement, will end up
turning in favor of the \"indignant\". \"Every time the police have used
force against us, our movement has gained new activists,\" said the
34-year-old receptionist, who himself joined the movement after the
arrest of some 700 demonstrators on the Brooklyn Bridge on October 1.
\"People know that this is not right,\" he added, referring to the
police raid, carried out under cover of darkness, which led to the
dismantling of the Zuccotti Square encampment and the arrest of nearly
200 people, including at least five journalists. Time will tell whether
Jeffrey Marx is right. In the meantime, Mayor Bloomberg has won a round
against the Zuccotti Park protesters. They will be able to continue
protesting in the square located a stone\'s throw from Wall Street, but
they will no longer be able to camp there, a New York judge confirmed
late this afternoon. \"They \[the protesters\] have failed to
demonstrate that remaining in Zuccotti Square falls within the scope of
the First Amendment\" of the American Constitution on freedom of
expression, Judge Michael Stallman wrote in his decision. The judge
added that the \"tents, equipment, generators and installations\" of the
Occupy Wall Street activists go against \"the rights and duties of the
owner to maintain the park, or the rights of people who would like to
enjoy this space in complete safety.\" Shortly after this verdict, the
New York police allowed the protesters to return to Zuccotti Square,
which is owned by the real estate company Brookfield Properties.
\"Zuccotti Square will remain open for all who wish to enjoy it, as long
as they respect the park\'s rules,\" Bloomberg said in a statement.
Earlier in the day, the New York mayor justified the eviction of the
protesters by citing reasons such as \"safety and health.\" \"The
majority of the protesters were peaceful and responsible. But a minority
were not, and as the number of protesters grew, it created an
intolerable situation,\" Bloomberg said at a press conference. Several
protesters celebrated the reopening of Zuccotti Square, which they had
occupied since September 17. In the early evening, the sound of drums
could be heard again, as well as the chanting of slogans. \"You can\'t
oust an idea,\" was one of the chants. However, all the protesters
vigorously denounced the NYPD raid, calling it \"brutal\" or
\"illegal.\" "They gave us 10 minutes to leave the park peacefully,"
said Tiffany Rose, a 27-year-old from New Jersey who camped out for 44
days at Zuccotti Square. "Within 10 minutes, they started using pepper
spray, stun grenades, tear gas and batons." "It was so clean and
organized here," she said. "We had our kitchen, our library with 500
books, our media center, our clinic. We had started to build a real
community and they destroyed it in a matter of hours." Jason LaTour, a
25-year-old New Yorker who worked in the camp's kitchen, painted a less
rosy picture of Zuccotti Square. "It had become unmanageable. More and
more people were coming here to drink and do drugs. It created an
unstable, dangerous environment." \"In a sense, the evacuation may help
restart the movement on a healthier footing,\" he said. Deborah Goodman,
a 50-year-old retired secretary, shares the same hope. \"Every time
Mayor Bloomberg tries to crush us, we come out stronger,\" she said.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:944

\"We are being taken for a ride with this decree,\" said yesterday PQ
MNA Marie Malavoy, who last spring campaigned with her colleague Sylvain
Simard for the cause of free software. \"It is very disappointing,
especially considering the battle we have waged.\" In broad terms,
decree number 1111-2011, adopted a few days ago by the Council of
Ministers and which, for the moment, has only been the subject of
limited distribution in circles of insiders and government IT suppliers,
gives the Shared Services Centre (CSP), the supplier of goods and
services to the government apparatus, the \"right to enter into
contracts under conditions different from those applicable to it under
the Act respecting contracting by public bodies,\" we can read.
Basically, until March 31, 2013, the Centre will be able to \"enter into
private contracts for the acquisition of software for a maximum period
of three years\" with several suppliers whose names and products are
listed in the decree. The giant Microsoft, with its hegemonic Windows
operating systems and Office suites, among others, is among them. As are
Oracle Canada, McAfee, IBM Canada, Adobe and Symantec. The Charest
government\'s decision yesterday surprised defenders of free software
who, last spring, had welcomed the adoption of Bill 133 on the
governance and management of information resources of public bodies and
government enterprises. In essence, this law affirms the need to make
more room for free software in the administration by opening the door to
calls for tenders. This had been far from being the case for several
years. At the time, the Minister responsible for Government
Administration, Michelle Courchesne, had also reaffirmed the
government\'s position in favour of the development of free software in
the state ecosystem. In contrast to so-called proprietary software,
these applications reduce the dependence of public bodies on large
industrial groups, improve data security and promote respect for digital
heritage. What\'s more, it could stimulate the creation, with state
funds, of a free software industry in Quebec and expertise in this
field. Several countries, including the United States, France and Great
Britain, are now encouraging their proliferation. \"Faced with free
software, politicians are becoming schizophrenic here,\" summarizes
Cyrille Béraud, president of the Professional Association of Free
Software Companies (APELL). On the one hand, there are speeches that
encourage the development of free software, and on the other, actions,
such as this decree, that ensure that nothing changes.\" Despite our
calls, it was not possible to speak to Ms. Courchesne yesterday.
However, through her press attaché, the minister insisted on reiterating
her support for this new form of software not associated with costly
operating licenses. \"This decree in no way affects the obligation of
organizations to respect the principle of calls for tenders,\" assures
Isabelle Mercille. \"It only targets secondary purchases.\" According to
the Shared Services Centre, the administrative document, known in the
private sector as the \"software decree,\" allows, among other things,
the awarding of contracts by mutual agreement only for updates or for
purchases for which managers have demonstrated that free software is not
a valid option. Nevertheless, for Ms. Malavoy, the decree mainly gives
\"the impression that free software is relegated elsewhere. For a period
of three years, proprietary software will have free rein,\" she said,
explaining this by the resistance to changes in the administration, but
also \"the significant pressure\" exerted by multinationals of licensed
software on the government and elected officials. According to the
public registry of lobbyists, the giant Microsoft has in fact hired
since December 2008 a major lobbyist from Quebec, Martin Daraiche of the
communications company National, in order to influence \"legislative and
regulatory proposals\" in its favor and position the company in
government calls for tenders, we can read. His mandate is, for the
moment, valid until the end of the year. Currently, almost all of the
373,000 computer workstations in the government apparatus as well as in
the health and education networks run under the Windows XP operating
system and have the Microsoft Office 2002, 2003 office suite. At the
beginning of November, at the Forum des dirigeant de l\'information, the
secretariat of the Conseil du trésor presented to an audience of
managers its scenario for updating the workstations of the state machine
for the next seven years, mentioning only the transition to Windows 7
and Office 2007, 2010 computing environments from the same
multinational. In a document of about sixty pages, which Le Devoir has
seen, free software is not mentioned anywhere. This computer
\"migration\", as they say in the industry, is estimated at \$2,000 per
workstation, for a total bill of\... approximately \$800 million spread
over seven years. \"Imagine the free software industry that we could
build here with that amount of money,\" says Mr. Béraud. \*\*\* With the
collaboration of Robert Dutrisac

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:945

Aiguille d\'Entrèves, at 3,600 meters in the Mont Blanc massif, on
August 13, Lionel Daudet, perched between France and Italy, greets his
climbing companion, Philippe Pellet, laughing: \"And one less!\" There
are still so many other peaks on his path\... no less than a thousand,
scattered over nearly 6,400 kilometers of an astonishing journey: at 43
years old, the mountaineer, adventurer and writer Lionel Daudet, known
as \"Dod\", has embarked on an unprecedented Tour de France. Having left
Mont Blanc on August 11, he has since followed the exact outline of the
land borders and coasts of France, banning any motorized mode of
transport. He heads back north, then follows the coasts of the Channel
and the Atlantic, as close as possible to the coast. He should reach the
foot of the Pyrenees in January and, if all goes well, reach the
Mediterranean two months later. At the end of the summer of 2012, after
a long climb up the Franco-Italian border, he will return to Mont Blanc.
That morning, the Alps stretch as far as the eye can see to the south of
the Aiguille d\'Entrèves, enhanced by the rising sun: thousands of
peaks, domes and needles. In the middle of this chaos, the border winds
its way to the invisible Mediterranean. Today, Dod will continue with
Philippe Pellet, known as \"Tronc\", the Aiguille de Toule, the Grand
Flambeau, the Pointe Helbronner, the Aiguilles Marbrées and the Dent du
Géant: fourteen hours of high-perched mountaineering between the Italian
Val d\'Aosta and the French Glacier du Géant, sometimes via classic
routes, more often on little-used or never-used terrain, often unstable.
Whatever the terrain encountered, he will only stray a few dozen meters
from the border, and a few meters at most when it is reduced to a sharp
ridge. \"No one has ever approached the border so closely on the
continuity,\" explains Dod. \"Even if I stop for a few days, I will
never break the line. Where I leave my ice axe on the border, I come
back to get it.\" His second obsession is accuracy: \"The terrain
dictates, of course, but I will stay as close as possible to the border
or the coast, depending on my physical means and logistical
requirements. It is a desire for authenticity, for elegance!\" Following
the line: this is truly a mountaineer\'s obsession. Lionel Daudet has
spent half his life identifying virgin faces, unknown summits,
everywhere in the world, to climb new ascent routes, as vertical and
straight as possible. He did it brilliantly, drawing beautiful and bold
lines that earned him the respect of his peers. With the same ethics,
Dod forces himself to follow as closely as possible another line, drawn
by men but that no one has ever fully traveled. An eternal adolescent, a
poet eager for challenges, he could not resist this crazy idea: \"I want
to be amazed. The capacity for astonishment is a quality of life. I feel
that this adventure arouses enthusiasm among the people I meet. It
brings a new perspective on the border, which brings together well-known
places and others that are ignored.\" The first part, from Mont Blanc to
Lake Geneva, required a month of intense effort from Dod and Tronc. They
bivouacked more than one night out of two, sometimes without a tent,
crossed the Grandes Jorasses, the wild ridges of Leschaux, Talèfre and
Triolet, always at an altitude of almost 4,000 m, up to Mont Dolent
whose summit spans Switzerland, Italy and France. They then rode the
ridges straight north, up to Lake Geneva, via the Aiguille
d\'Argentière, that of the Tour, and after the only descent through the
Chamonix valley, via the Haut Giffre and the Chablais, sometimes wild
massifs. \"We had very little information, we worked on instinct, on
experience,\" says Dod. \"Only the pioneering spirit and adaptation to
the terrain allow you to find the route.\" They knew how to get around
the difficulties that were too pronounced, on rock as well as on ice.
They had to keep their distance, never letting up to avoid making a
mistake or a loose block that would have dragged them down together.
\"Very often, we felt like we were in a minefield, with very risky
descents. There were a few pretty close calls,\" Dod admits. Meaning:
rock falls that could have led to the worst. Dod was hit in the shoulder
under the Dolent. He won\'t say more. Physical suffering has been part
of his daily life since his amputations - eight and a half out of ten
toes frozen during a solitary and stubborn winter stay on the north face
of the Matterhorn. His right foot often hurts. A raw nerve, wounds that
regularly reopen: he tightens the laces of his shoes and doesn\'t talk
about it, preferring to continue to marvel at new horizons, laugh and
savor his freedom. On the morning of September 12, Dod boarded a
Polynesian pirogue. He assembled a crack team to cross Lake Geneva,
using paddles and GPS to stay within a metre of the Swiss and French
waters, including the right angle off Geneva. The crew was led by Franck
Ardisson, Olympic champion. The 60 km were covered in seven hours. Dod
kept up the pace but could no longer feel his shoulders, he laughs. He
has an astonishing ability to bring along friends and new recruits.
Isabelle Autissier can testify to this: to enable him to climb virgin
peaks in Antarctica with Patrick Wagnon and Mathieu Cortial, she had
pushed her sailboat further south than she had ever done before, to 70°
south latitude, and landed on icy shores where no one had yet risked
their keel. The next day, the \"Dodtour\" took on a new rhythm, far from
the high mountains. Daudet prepares to walk and cycle to the Rhine,
across the Jura, alone or joined here and there by a friend or a friend
of a friend for part of the way. That day, across the Geneva plain, the
border is capricious, tortured. Compass in hand, Dod tirelessly consults
his 1:25,000 maps which mention each building, each stream and all the
border markers. Here, they are granite blocks laid by the Swiss in 1816.
When the border follows the course of a stream, the markers are rare. If
the boundary runs through a field or a wood, they are sometimes only a
hundred meters apart. Dod tries to find them all, caresses them before
setting off towards the next one: \"There is a playful aspect to this,
complicit in my demand for precision and elegance. I do it without being
a prisoner of it!\" Sometimes, the marker is in the middle of a beet
field or a freshly plowed field. The walker goes around it without
regret, wondering about the hazards of history that have fixed the
border here and there: \"It has a ridiculous side: what is the meaning
of this piece of rock at the end of a field?\" The border enters the
agglomeration of Annemasse following a stream, the Foron. Paradoxically,
this portion is as deserted as in the mountains: the inhabitants, on
both sides, turn their backs on the Foron. The walls of the properties
sometimes completely enclose the watercourse, Daudet then wades through
the mud of the no man\'s land, laughing, crossing the villages
incognito. Sometimes, a passer-by on a bridge observes him below, taken
aback. One of them grumbles: \"But what an idea!\" Daudet smiles and
continues on his way. Often, a path on the Swiss bank allows you to move
quickly, it is the vestige of the Swiss customs path. \"They stopped
patrolling here at least fifteen years ago!\" assures a local resident.
\"Now, they prefer to stay in their cars.\" Further on, the border is
bordered by a road on the French side. Daudet has arranged to meet Véro,
his partner, an accomplice in many of his adventures. She will accompany
him in a camper van in the coming months, with a stock of 1:25,000 maps,
a kayak, a mountain bike and supplies. Daudet gets on his bike and goes
up against a long traffic jam of cross-border workers, French people
working in Switzerland. They cross the border every day, without
realizing it anymore. By the evening, Daudet has covered about thirty
kilometers of border at the cost of fourteen hours of effort: a solid
stage, a drop in the ocean on the scale of the journey! On October 1st,
after crossing the Jura and paddling on the Doubs, he reached, moved,
the Rhine, which separates Germany and France over 200 km. Franck
Ardisson joined him. They embarked in a two-seater kayak for long days
of paddling interspersed with countless crossings of dams, on this
border heavy with history. \"I don\'t want to be taken over by the
nationalists,\" Daudet sighs. \"I would like, by crossing the line, to
shatter the notion of a barrier border to highlight that of a hyphenated
border!\" In the coming months, \"with antennas deployed,\" he will
cross former war zones, pass through Sangatte and La Hague, cross old
paths of smugglers and smugglers. He will be accompanied on the landing
beaches by veterans, a German and an American, elsewhere by local
friends or locals he met by chance. He hopes to sail to tickle the
southern tip of Corsica, after an unprecedented crossing of the Pyrenees
by the border line, a high-level route never done in winter. He wants to
treat himself to the complete crossing of the coves at water level by
climbing, which he has only managed once so far. \"My driving force is
the search for difficulty, but this adventure only takes on meaning
through the encounters it allows, through the stories I discover. It\'s
like free, participatory software: I provide the foundation and I take
the time to travel and listen.\" Notice to enthusiasts\... Photos
François Carrel

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:946

The documentary seems sad today. The tall concrete and glass buildings,
already not very cheerful in themselves, struggle to stand out from the
cloudy and heavy sky. But the uniform grayness is not an aesthetic
choice: if it\'s ugly in the film, it\'s because it\'s ugly in real life
at the time we\'re watching it. The images are directly connected to
Yahoo!\'s weather application and generated in real time according to
the weather in Toronto, the location of the filming. One Millionth Tower
(1) is the latest episode in a series of web documentaries on high-rise
apartment buildings and the living conditions of their occupants,
Highrise, initiated and produced by the National Film Board (NFB) of
Canada. These short films each explore the possibilities of
interactivity in their own way: one accompanies a slideshow of photos
with voice-over narrations, the other offers a 360° virtual tour of the
tower\'s apartments\... But One Millionth Tower is by far the most
ambitious and the most audacious. Not content with letting itself be
directed by the Internet user, who literally moves around the 3D image
with the arrow keys on his keyboard, he can interact with the entire
Internet. \"We wanted to marry this magical ability that cinema has to
tell stories, with the power of the Web,\" explains the director, Kat
Cizek. In different places, under various pretexts, the web documentary
\"calls\" information from Internet sites to integrate it into its very
image: the weather forecast from Yahoo! so, but also Wikipedia articles
on eco-responsible buildings, maps from Google Maps, photos of building
renovations from Flickr\... Such enrichment is made possible thanks to
Popcorn.js, a brand new technological \"toolbox\" overseen by the
Mozilla Foundation (developer of the Firefox browser). In its online
version, which is quickly tamed, Popcorn allows, for example, subtitles
or tweets to be embedded in the video, by synchronizing their appearance
and disappearance to the nearest second. \"We work together to open up
perspectives for creators and model tools that are easy to use by
everyone,\" explains Mark Surman, CEO of Mozilla. \"It\'s our testament
to a better Web, which we must build together.\" Popcorn particularly
interested web journalists present at the Media, Freedom & the Web
festival last weekend in London (see Libération of November 7), where
One Millionth Tower was screened as a world premiere. Director Kat Cizek
believes that the culture of the open Web and free software championed
by Mozilla should be shared by public institutions like the NFB: \"Art
and life are much more fun when you build something new on other
people\'s ideas!\" (1) highrise.nfb.ca/ onemillionthtower

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:947

A black-circled 11 as a profile picture. A meager activity for this
Facebook page created at the end of October and that 11,646 people have
already joined. Its name? \"We must not miss November 11, 2011 at
11:11\" (tinyurl.com/c8x9z7a). A few photos duel, those of digital
clocks frozen on an \"11:11\" and an invitation to make \"the most
memorable wish of the year\" at exactly 11:11 and 11 seconds. Same time,
same date. \"The beginning of this new millennium marked the beginning
of interesting dates in terms of format,\" emphasizes the site
timeanddate.com (tinyurl.com/bsuh6fl). The year 2011 alone gave us three
opportunities to make a wish with dates with the same sequence or
numbers, such as 11/1/11, 1/11/11 and 11/11/11. Already, 2010 had graced
us with a 10/10/10 at 10:10 and even a 20/10/2010 at 20:10. For my part,
I waited, in all futility, for this sequential date of 9/10/11 counting
down the 14 seconds that followed 12:13. And in terms of a fully
palindrome date, have you paid any attention to the date of 10/02/2001,
which still took 809 years to arrive (tinyurl.com/bwuyerd)? And to think
that Valéry Giscard d\'Estaing chose February 20, 2002 to inaugurate the
Vulcania park, \"pushing the \"palindromism\" to the time of the
ceremony which took place at 8:02 p.m.\" (tinyurl.com/czj4ew) Only one
date of this kind is still approaching, which none of us will see in
real time: 12/21/2112 at 9:12 p.m. Same date, different wish. \"November
11 is a well-known date to us because it marks the end of the First
World War,\" we can read on the Framablog blog, dedicated to free
software. But this year, in a 6-digit date format, it will be written
11/11/11, namely a magnificent and perfect binary date. » From this
\"digital excuse\" was born an initiative of Spanish-speaking free
software Internet users who will celebrate this November 11 \"the
beginning of the century of free software\" (tinyurl.com/6whfmjh). On
this 11/11/11, everyone is making their wishes!

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:948

Seven departments and agencies of the Quebec government have just formed
a first \"free software community\" around a Quebec product, IntelliGID,
which allows the management of the entire life cycle of electronic
documents, from their creation to archiving. This project marks a major
change in the way the State manages its software needs. Instead of
purchasing licenses for a closed software suite, the seven organizations
pool their resources to adapt open-source software to their needs. If an
organization modifies the product for a specific need, this modification
automatically becomes accessible to all other users of the software,
free of charge. The system thus avoids paying multiple times for a new
feature, by eliminating all licensing costs related to the use of the
product. IntelliGID was designed by the company Doculibre, with the
participation of Bibliothèque et Archives nationales du Québec, which is
part of the new community, as is the Secrétariat du Conseil du trésor,
moreover. This management tool aims to ensure the sustainability of
government digital heritage and supports the Government Integrated
Document Management Framework. Apache Model The IntelliGID community\'s
operating process is inspired by the Apache Software Foundation,
explains Rida Benjelloun, President and CEO of Doculibre Inc.
\"Everything is based on the concept of sharing and recognition.
Decisions are made by consensus, through a voting system,\" he explains.
At the top of the community is a management committee that defines the
project\'s directions and chooses the \"developers.\" A technical
committee ensures the software runs smoothly and provides support. Then,
committers are chosen, who are programmers or document management
specialists. The recruitment process is based on meritocracy. Only those
who have made the most significant contribution to the application and
the community are included, explains Mr. Benjelloun, who himself was
once one of Apache\'s 2,000 or so committers. He hopes that the
government will take advantage of this openness, facilitated by Law 133
on the management of information resources. He would like to see not
only other free software communities, but also \"software forges\" that
can identify free software designed and supported by the government, to
make it known to the entire government apparatus. passelin@lesoleil.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:949

"Don't just use the Web; start building it." Come on, get to work! What
are you still doing hanging around in the introduction to this article?
The cyber-rhetoric class starts in three minutes, there's still time to
get going. Then you can head to room 211 to start a blog on Wordpress
and learn how to monetize it in room 209. A few meters further on, it's
around the video that we rack our brains: how to subtitle it without any
editing skills? If you're feeling even more adventurous, write your
first lines of Javascript code to program a platform game. From the
first to the sixth floor, the building is teeming with workshops and
construction sites. It is to transmit this culture of sharing that
characterizes the world of free software that the Mozilla Foundation,
known for developing the Firefox browser, organized the Freedom, Media &
the Web festival this weekend. Three days of meetings in the very
stylish Ravensbourne College in London, with its half-floors, balconies,
walkways and its Gruyère façade pierced with giant portholes. The motto
is simple: \"Let\'s come together to build real projects that will
change the media, the Web and the world\" (\"without wanting to put
pressure on you\", specifies the official site). But why is Mozilla
interested in the media, after a first edition of the festival devoted,
last year, to education? \"Because journalism evolves twice as slowly as
the rest of the Web, summarizes Katharina Borchert, boss of Spiegel
online, the site of the German weekly. In the editorial offices, we cram
the developers into the cellar and we talk to them once a week when we
need them. We have to succeed in marrying those who make the stories and
those who make the tools. Understand each other to build together.\"
UFO. Some are there to pass on their knowledge - like this Al-Jazeera
journalist who hosted a round table (without a table, but with tablets)
on his experience of live-blogging during the Arab revolutions. Others
want to learn. Still others have a great project and need collaborators
to find applications for it. This is the case of Chris and Nico, who are
showing off on the sixth floor with their Octocopter. Half spider, half
UFO, their eight-propeller machine can hover a camera at an altitude of
20 meters to film impressive aerial shots. \"But the Octocopter also
records metadata during its flight: its GPS coordinates, its altitude,
the temperature and air pressure, its energy consumption\... All this
data could be processed to enrich the video.\" Good ideas are legion;
all that remains is to find the right tool to implement them. And
that\'s just as well! The Popcorn.js team is there. Its software allows
you to enrich a video by synchronizing it, to the nearest hundredth of a
second, with all sorts of data extracted from a database, or even from
the Web, in real time. \"The first generation of Internet users were
very keen on tinkering,\" recalls Mitchell Baker, president of the
Mozilla Foundation. \"Today, things are changing: the Internet is
increasingly linked to consumer behavior. We see very beautiful things,
easy to use; the iPhone and the iPad are the paradigm of this \"elegant
consumption.\" But it is enriching and gratifying to be able to touch
these tools, change them, to build the Web ourselves.\" Determined not
to leave the future of the Internet in the hands of private and opaque
companies (in the crosshairs, Facebook and Apple), the Mozilla community
advocates the appropriation of the network and technologies by Internet
users themselves. We must lift the hood, study the engine, get our hands
dirty. In short, you have to \"hack\" everything that falls into your
hands. \"Real life\". The 600 people who occupied Ravensbourne College
lent themselves to the game with disconcerting enthusiasm. British,
Americans, but also Brazilians, French, Lebanese, Jordanians,
Germans\... All have written their Twitter handle on their badge, below
their name. One eye on the screen of their laptop and the other on the
co-festival-goers, they double the \"in real life\" meetings with an
uninterrupted online conversation, traceable with the hashtag (keyword)
#mozfest. \"Human applications\", recognizable by their white coats,
wander through the crooked corners of the College to help whoever feels
the need with a particular technical skill. The most important thing
will be to then apply what we discovered in London. Share our findings,
pass on the message. And stay in touch with the people we meet, even the
one dressed as a red panda, the Firefox logo. In the \"big space\" on
the fourth floor, he plays a game of geek ping-pong: the racket in his
right hand, a smartphone in his left to film in subjective view. The
referee updates the score on a hastily coded application, displayed on
the computer. Just a few points, time to let off steam before the next
session \"Let\'s write the bible of data journalism\". Photo Immo Klink

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:950

INTERNET The success is significant. For the first time, in October,
Microsoft\'s Internet Explorer browser fell below the 50% market share
mark, according to a study by Netmarketshare. A few years ago, this
software, offered from the outset with the Windows operating system, was
riding high at over 90% market share. Its supremacy has been challenged
since 2004 by Firefox, a free browser developed by the Mozilla
Foundation and thousands of volunteer developers. In September, the
latter became the second most used browser in the world, with between 20
and 25% market share depending on the country. In its wake, other
browsers, such as Google\'s Chrome, were launched, finally shaking up
the Microsoft giant. This victory is not essential for the community of
developers and enthusiasts gathered this weekend in London for the
Mozilla Festival. The projects that were initiated there aim to realize
a greater ambition. \"Mozilla is best known for Firefox, but our project
is broader: we want to build an open, transparent and decentralized
Internet,\" like Firefox, recalled Mitchell Baker, the iconic president
of the Mozilla Foundation, at the opening of the event. Media and
journalists To achieve this, Mozilla is now working beyond the sphere of
developers. A year ago, the Mozilla Festival dedicated to education thus
made it possible to launch projects facilitating the training and
transmission of this digital culture. This year, the conference was
focused on the media and journalists. \"The disruption caused by
technology in terms of journalism is considerable,\" explains Mitchell
Baker. \"We want to help the billion people who use the Internet to
become its builders, by building tools and educating them,\" continues
Mark Surman, executive director of the Mozilla Foundation. With the rise
of Internet uses, these are as many front lines that multiply for
Mozilla. So, while Facebook is infiltrating the Web with its Facebook
Connect tools, Mozilla has started working on a dashboard to manage your
digital identity. The slayer of the proprietary Internet is also
attacking mobile ecosystems with the launch of an open source mobile
operating system, Boot2Gecko. \"Our goal is to have a sufficient market
share to be viable and to shake up the market. We have seen with Firefox
that we start to have a little influence with 5% market share and that
at 10% we have considerable influence\", explains Mitchell Baker.
However, Mozilla does not intend to develop a social network or even
network infrastructures that would guarantee the neutrality of the
Internet. \"Our role is to help people understand the Net and to alter
it\", continues the president of Mozilla. With the hope that this will
be enough to preserve the original spirit of the Net.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:951

Former Tunisian President Zine El-Abidine Ben Ali had partly understood
the importance of technological innovation and the potential of the
digital economy, and he left a country rather better placed than many of
his peers. But the paradox of the dictator in the digital age is that he
cannot tolerate innovation without control and that he enshrines it in
institutions. A real time bomb. Rare in the world (traveling teaches us
not to say \"unique\" lightly), the Tunisian Internet Agency (ATI) is
the technical manager of the three main functions of the network of
networks: domain names, IP addresses and the IXP, the Internet Exchange
Point (\"the physical infrastructure through which Internet service
providers exchange traffic between their networks\" to increase
bandwidth while reducing costs, Wikipedia explains to us). However,
Khaled Koubaa, president of the Internet Society Tunisia, tells me,
\"these three functions must always be separated.\" It\'s a bit like a
single body concentrating the three powers that are the executive, the
legislative and the judiciary\... like in a dictatorship. \"The ATI was
closely linked to the \[presidential\] palace,\" adds Moez Chakchouk,
who is its current boss. \"It is a very well-equipped and profitable
technical agency. It promoted the digital economy while working with the
regime. It had a role in innovation but controlled the media.\" This
control is in fact a fourth function, that of security of the regime
with which the ATI is thus invested. \"It was considered the iron
curtain of the Internet at the time of Ben Ali,\" adds Mr. Chakchouk.
Appointed in the early days of the revolution, he does everything he can
to limit the damage. First point: no more secrets. He receives media and
bloggers. He opened a free platform for free or open source software and
another providing the instruments to thwart censorship. He proposes to
leave the control of the content to the discretion of each user without
the State or an intermediary company having their say. He wants the ATI
to become a neutral actor and for other operators to be allowed to be
present in the capital. It must not be destroyed as some demanded at the
beginning of the revolution. \"It must be transformed.\" A formidably
dangerous tool For Khaled Koubaa, as long as the tool exists under these
conditions, it can be used differently. He supports Moez Chakchouk, but
he adds (and the person concerned is well aware of this): \"The
revolution has changed the CEO but not the structure. All you have to do
is fire him to return to censorship. It is extremely dangerous.\" The
problem is very concrete: ordered to censor pornographic sites, Moez
Chackchouk refused to do so. Convicted by the court, he appealed and now
appealed to the Court of Cassation. And that is where the problem lies.
As long as the ATI is regulated as it is today, the judge (this is not
the worst case scenario) can force it to censor. His successor, who
should be appointed soon, will not necessarily have the courage to stand
up to him until the end. This is a poisoned chalice that Ben Ali left by
offering the new leaders the temptation not to destroy a tool that
works, but which is terribly dangerous. The situation risks quickly
becoming complicated because it must be understood that it is less the
actors directly involved than the structure in place that poses a
problem. We are entitled to wonder what Nicolas Sarkozy, José Luis
Rodriguez Zapatero or David Cameron would do if they had such a tool.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:952

EDUCATION Unlike in previous years, the French came in large numbers to
the World Innovation Summit for Education, or Wise, the international
summit on education in Qatar that ended yesterday. An event that has
become \"unmissable\" according to Luc Chatel, the Minister of
Education, who made the trip. In barely three years of existence, this
summit created by Sheikha Moza, wife of the Emir of Qatar, has become
\"a sort of Davos of education,\" according to the minister. Of course,
relations between the two countries are \"at an excellent level\" in
diplomatic and economic matters. Luc Chatel\'s Qatari counterpart has
just made the teaching of French in schools compulsory again. In fact,
around forty French people were present for the occasion. By coming to
Wise, French officials hoped, among other things, to \"fertilize the
French education system.\" Strange initiatives According to Luc Chatel,
the many international meetings allow us to imagine what the school of
the future will look like: \"It will no longer be the blackboard, the
stage and the students taking notes.\" He imagines instead
\"amphitheaters\" for 70 students and small rooms for individualized
support for 5 or 6 students. The individualization of teaching is the
key word at Wise, where, from Poland to Australia, via Canada and Great
Britain, all political leaders agree on this point. \"Here, we don\'t
just talk about means: it changes!\" says the minister. They also
advocate the autonomy of establishments, while recognizing that reforms
in education are the most difficult to implement with those in health:
\"Ask Obama!\" says a Jordanian representative. Pragmatic, the Qataris
highlight what works in terms of education. Some initiatives seem a bit
strange, such as this Danish principal who explains that he had to
interview the students to get his job. In this Sydney school, the math
teachers are also researchers and the English teachers are poets! As for
the Norwegian teacher Magdalene Storsveen, she claims that the students
who play the online game World of Warcraft are also those who speak
English best\... The French are keen to show that they are innovative.
\"We are making progress on school dropout. And our boarding schools of
excellence are generating a lot of interest abroad, as is the skills
booklet,\" says Jean-Michel Blanquer, Director General of School
Education. Wise also allows for lobbying. For example, to establish the
principle of free software in education, some hope. But above all, such
a summit gives international prestige to an often neglected field, even
if it represents one of the main concerns of the populations everywhere
in the world. A strong sign of this is this year\'s inaugural Wise Prize
for Education, worth \$500,000. It was awarded to Bangladeshi Sir Fazle
Hazan Abed, founder of the educational NGO Brac, in recognition of a
career dedicated to reducing poverty through education.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:953

Frustration can be a powerful driver of academic innovation. Richard
Baraniuk, 46, knows something about it. A professor of electrical
engineering, twelve years ago he created Connexions, a knowledge-sharing
website where anyone can consult courses sent by volunteer contributors.
This global school textbook evolves as its members contribute. : a snub
to the rigid world of school publishing. This discovery owes much to
Richard Baraniuk\'s personal experience. In 1999, this Canadian, who
also has American citizenship, taught electrical engineering at Rice
University in Houston (Texas). He was passionate about the subject, but
the young teacher struggled to capture the attention of his 25 students.
\"I was frustrated by the way students were educated in American
universities, with textbooks: I saw that this method did not reach many
of them,\" analyzes Richard Baraniuk. So I tried to explain to them that
signal processing is one of the fundamental ideas behind the Internet.\"
Over the course of the year, the professor worked to erase the
disconnection between university teaching and the real world. The method
was successful. He realized that \"one of the most important things in
education is to personalize the subject matter to the class and to each
individual.\" How could he extend the experience beyond his students? At
the time, publishing a textbook seemed the only solution. But a book is
expensive to publish, and its content does not evolve over time. The
turning point came when Richard Baraniuk installed Linux, an \"open
source\" operating system, on his computer that anyone was free to
modify. \"I told myself that this idea could be applied to school
textbooks. In ten minutes, it was clear to me.\" The rest took more
time. \"Two, three\" professors and students helped him design
Connexions, an \"open source\" education platform. A few months later,
Rice University invested in the project. It was not until 2002 that
funds, particularly from the Hewlett Foundation, began to arrive. In
total, the site has received \$15 million (€11.3 million) from various
associations to date. 2002 also marked the arrival of Creative Commons
licenses, which protect authors\' rights while facilitating the
circulation of their creations. In 2006, Richard Baraniuk summarized the
principle of Connexions at TED, a prestigious Californian conference.
\"Imagine taking the world\'s books. Imagine digitizing them and storing
them in an interconnected global warehouse,\" he told his audience.
\"Think of an iTunes for books,\" added this music enthusiast. The
comparison with iTunes is only partly valid. On Connexions, the
modules - the equivalent of three pages of a school textbook on a
specific topic - can be consulted for free. The platform, which has
continued to expand since 2002, lists more than 19,000, grouped under
more than a thousand \"collections\" or themes. It is also possible to
write by e-mail to the author of the module. A notable difference with
Wikipedia, the online encyclopedia born in 2001 and which is enriched,
like Connexions, thanks to collaborative work. Six people work for
Richard Baraniuk\'s project. The site is linked to Rice University but
the majority of its content is produced by people outside the
institution. The platform attracts about 2 million visitors each month
and has 10,000 registered members. \"2,000 of them are active and send
contributions regularly,\" says Richard Baraniuk. The content, mainly in
English and at university level, is rich in science and electrical
engineering, but also includes music lessons or literacy modules
intended for India. Quality control of articles is a constant challenge.
The few pages in French are currently only poor translations, unusable.
But some articles are certified by contributors, according to the
principle of \"peer review\". The IEEE, the world association of
electrical and electronics engineers, has validated the content of about
fifteen collections on electrical engineering. Richard Baraniuk denies
wanting to make manual writers work for free. \"There are two categories
of authors. Professionals in educational content: they cannot work for
free. But the second category is that of professors. By publishing a
manual, which brings in little financially, most of them want above all
to move things forward, to leave a trace. By using the site, they have
the possibility of being read by millions of Internet users.\" In fact,
the hundred modules on electrical engineering that he has written have
been consulted 5 million times. Richard Baraniuk now divides his working
hours between teaching at the university and his project. "I have two
full-time jobs," he says. In ten years, he dreams of classrooms using
Connexions textbooks. And he hopes that "20% to 50% of the world's
textbooks will be free or open access." Frustration can be a potent
force for educational innovation. Ask electrical engineering professor
Richard Baraniuk. Twelve years ago Baraniuk, now forty-six, set up
Connexions, a knowledge-sharing platform offering Web users free access
to courses designed by volunteer contributors, together with the chance
to share their own skills. The result: a worldwide "digital educational
ecosystem" that evolves in line with member input and cocks a snook at
the hidebound world of educational publishing. This godsend owes a lot
to Baraniuk's own experience. In 1999, this Canadian-American was
teaching electrotechnology at Rice University in Houston, Texas. He
loved his discipline, but wasn\'t happy with his job: the students in
his classes of 25 were finding the subject dreary and holding their
attention was a problem. "I was frustrated with the textbook-based
teaching approach in American universities, because I could see it
wasn\'t reaching a lot of students. I teach signal processing and my
challenge was to show that this seemingly dry math is actually the
center of this tremendously powerful Web." In his classes, he worked at
repairing the "disconnects" between university teaching and the real
world. It worked. He felt more commitment coming from his students and
realized that "one of the most important things in education is
customizing the subject for the class and for each individual student".
The experiment worked just fine, but how to extend it beyond the limited
circle of his classes? At the time, a textbook seemed the only solution,
but Baraniuk was quick to spot the cost of editing a book, and the
problem of ongoing content updates. Things fell into place almost by
chance, when he was installing on his computer the open-source operating
system Linux. "I realized this idea could work for textbooks as well. In
ten minutes, I had it worked out." The next step took longer. From the
start, a few other teachers and students were ready to lend a hand with
designing the new, open-source educational content repository. A few
months later, Rice put some money into the project. But it wasn\'t until
2002 that funding, notably from the Hewlett Foundation, really started
coming in. So far, the site has received \$15m from various bodies. 2002
also saw the creation of the Creative Commons licenses that protect
authors\' rights while allowing free circulation of their material. In
2006, Baraniuk summed up the Connexions concept at the prestigious
annual TED conference in California: "Imagine taking all the world\'s
books and imagine just tearing out the pages, digitizing them and
storing them in a vast interconnected global repository\... Think of it,
added the man who was a DJ at his university, as a massive iTunes for
book-type content." The iTunes comparison is only partly valid, since
the Connexions "modules" - each one the equivalent of three textbook
pages on a specific subject - can be accessed and used for free. The
platform hasn\'t stopped expanding since 2002 and now includes over
19,000 modules grouped together in more than a thousand "collections".
If you like, you can email the module\'s author - something you can\'t
do with Wikipedia, the online encyclopedia born in 2001, which shares
the Connexions fondness for teamwork. The team in question is currently
six strong, but despite the Rice University base, the bulk of the
content comes from outside contributors. Connections pulls in some two
million individual visitors every month and boasts 10,000 registered
members. "2000 of them are active, sending in regular contributions,"
says Baraniuk. The content, mainly in English and aimed at
university-level consumers, shows a marked science and electrotechnology
leaning, but its most consulted offerings also include music courses and
modules for teaching children in India to read. With fresh articles
arriving on the site daily, quality control is a full-time challenge,
but articles can be certified by other contributors through the peer
review principle. For example, the IEEE (International Electrical and
Electronic Engineers Association) has so far given its seal of approval
to fifteen collections falling within its domain. Given the site\'s
collaborative, open-source structure, Baraniuk has had to defend himself
against accusations of making his writers work for nothing: "Authors in
the field fall into two categories. Firstly, the educational content
professionals, who can\'t work for free. But the second group is made up
of teachers; for most of them publishing a textbook, which brings in
very little money, is first and foremost a way of advancing knowledge
and leaving a legacy. Our message is, "You can publish your textbook and
sell maybe 5,000 copies. Or you can use the site, and have the
opportunity to reach millions of Internet users. »» The hundred or so
electrical engineering modules he has written himself have so far
clocked up 5 million visits, and Connexions has now joined forces with
print-on-demand publisher QooP for production of low-price textbooks.
Richard Baraniuk is currently dividing his time between university
teaching and his project - "I have two full-time jobs," he says. He
dreams that, ten years from now, Connexions textbooks will be used in
classrooms. And hopes that, by then, "20-50% of the world\'s textbooks
will be free or open-source."

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:954

Frustration can be a potent force for educational innovation. Ask
electrical engineering professor Richard Baraniuk. Twelve years ago
Baraniuk, now forty-six, set up Connexions, a knowledge-sharing platform
offering Web users free access to courses designed by volunteer
contributors, together with the chance to share their own skills.
Result: a worldwide \"digital educational ecosystem\" that evolves in
line with member input and cocks a snook at the hidebound world of
educational publishing. This godsend owes a lot to Baraniuk\'s own
experience. In 1999, this Canadian-American was teaching
electrotechnology at Rice University in Houston, Texas. He loved his
discipline, but wasn\'t happy with his job: the students in his classes
of 25 were finding the subject dreary and holding their attention was a
problem. \"I was frustrated with the textbook-based teaching approach in
American universities, because I could see it wasn\'t reaching a lot of
students. I teach signal processing and my challenge was to show that
this seemingly dry math is actually the center of this tremendously
powerful Web.\" In his classes, he worked at repairing the
\"disconnects\" between university teaching and the real world. It
worked. He felt more commitment coming from his students and realized
that \"one of the most important things in education is customizing the
subject for the class and for each individual student\". The experiment
worked just fine, but how to extend it beyond the limited circle of his
classes? At the time, a textbook seemed the only solution, but Baraniuk
was quick to spot the cost of editing a book, and the problem of ongoing
content updates. Things fell into place almost by chance, when he was
installing on his computer the open-source operating system Linux. \"I
realized this idea could work for textbooks as well. In ten minutes, I
had it worked out.\" The next step took longer. From the start, a few
other teachers and students were ready to lend a hand with designing the
new, open-source educational content repository. A few months later,
Rice put some money into the project. But it wasn\'t until 2002 that
funding, notably from the Hewlett Foundation, really started coming in.
So far, the site has received \$15m from various bodies. 2002 also saw
the creation of the Creative Commons licenses that protect authors\'
rights while allowing free circulation of their material. In 2006,
Baraniuk summed up the Connexions concept at the prestigious annual TED
conference in California: \"Imagine taking all the world\'s books and
imagine just tearing out the pages, digitizing them and storing them in
a vast interconnected global repository\... Think of it, added the man
who was a DJ at his university, as a massive iTunes for book-type
content.\" The iTunes comparison is only partly valid, since the
Connexions \"modules\" - each one the equivalent of three textbook pages
on a specific subject - can be accessed and used for free. The platform
hasn\'t stopped expanding since 2002 and now includes over 19,000
modules grouped together in more than a thousand \"collections\". If you
like, you can email the module\'s author - something you can\'t do with
Wikipedia, the online encyclopedia born in 2001, which shares the
Connexions fondness for teamwork. The team in question is currently six
strong, but despite the Rice University base, the bulk of the content
comes from outside contributors. Connections pulls in some two million
individual visitors every month and boasts 10,000 registered members.
"2000 of them are active, sending in regular contributions," says
Baraniuk. The content, mainly in English and aimed at university-level
consumers, shows a marked science and electrotechnology leaning, but its
most consulted offerings also include music courses and modules for
teaching children in India to read. With fresh articles arriving on the
site daily, quality control is a full-time challenge, but articles can
be certified by other contributors through the peer review principle.
For example, the IEEE (International Electrical and Electronic Engineers
Association) has so far given its seal of approval to fifteen
collections falling within its domain. Given the site\'s collaborative,
open-source structure, Baraniuk has had to defend himself against
accusations of making his writers work for nothing: \"Authors in the
field fall into two categories. Firstly, the educational content
professionals, who can\'t work for free. But the second group is made up
of teachers; for most of them publishing a textbook, which brings in
very little money, is first and foremost a way of advancing knowledge
and leaving a legacy. Our message is, \"You can publish your textbook
and sell maybe 5,000 copies. Or you can use the site, and have the
opportunity to reach millions of Internet users. \"\" The hundred or so
electrical engineering modules he has written himself have so far
clocked up 5 million visits, and Connexions has now joined forces with
print-on-demand publisher QooP for production of low-price textbooks.
Richard Baraniuk is currently dividing his time between university
teaching and his project - \"I have two full-time jobs,\" he says. He
dreams that, ten years from now, Connexions textbooks will be used in
classrooms. And hopes that, by then, \"20-50% of the world\'s textbooks
will be free or open-source.\" Yann Bouchez

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:955

Beyond the daily miseries and the announced deprivations, our leaders no
longer hide the risk of collapse and chaos. A sudden surge after years
of complacency towards financial capital, its arrogance, the explosion
of its toxic products, the prosperity of its tax havens, its unbridled
race towards extravagant profits. But, even today, while trying to
extinguish the most threatening sources of fire, the governments in
place, prisoners of their economic model, are not tackling its excesses
head on. And the people are demonstrating their indignation. Already hit
by unemployment, the erosion of purchasing power, the dismantling of
public services, the degradation of the environment, the extension of
exclusion zones, these people are trying to oppose the successive
austerity plans that are reducing activity and employment. But their
indignation is struggling to transform into commitment; Public opinion,
under strong ideological and media pressure, encouraged to withdraw into
personal interests, has difficulty conceiving the viability of another
economy that is free from the sole pursuit of profit and that focuses on
people, their better living, and the protection of their environment.
And yet, there are paths, alternatives to this other economy; they are
already emerging. We encounter them everywhere in multiple forms,
although still fragmented. Myriads of social and solidarity initiatives
are flourishing, which do not create deficits or debts, which do not
squander energy. We find them where the market is shrinking due to a
lack of sufficient profitability: AMAPs - Associations for the
maintenance of peasant agriculture, these local circuits, carrying
organic products and an alliance between farmers and city dwellers -
with fair trade based on cooperation; from integration companies
recruiting, training, and qualifying people rejected from the job market
to ethical, solidarity, and territorial funds (such as France Active)
that ensure their development; from associative daycare centers to
intergenerational residences; from shared gardens to carpooling and the
eco-construction of popular education; from street shows to free
software\... these initiatives are investments (not costs) that
anticipate and prepare other modes of production, consumption, and
power. They can only prosper when sheltered from the all-powerful power
of money. It is to give them their rightful place, to multiply them, to
strengthen them, but also to irrigate and pollinate the entire economy
and society that we launched the general states of the social and
solidarity economy, bringing together 5,000 people at the Palais
Brongniart (this former stock exchange that became a place for debates
on values other than money for three days in June). It is in the same
spirit that we have brought back from the field 400 \"notebooks of
hope\", which express a capacity for resistance to financial excesses,
for innovation, cooperation, and transformation. And it is in this
movement that more than 100 organizations and personalities have signed
a joint declaration (1) emphasizing the challenges and paths of an
economy based on another conception of wealth, its sharing and on a
deepening of democracy by listening to and participating citizens. The
political class (at least those among them who are attached to democracy
and progress) is not insensitive to these solidarity initiatives, but it
has not yet managed to appropriate them; it appreciates their
restorative role better than their capacity to transform the system; it
is up to it to take their measure both in terms of social ties and job
creation, of real wealth. It is high time to give them the means to
change scale to meet the challenges. This is the objective of this month
of November, dedicated to the social and solidarity economy, where
thousands of initiatives are displayed and deployed that demonstrate the
commitment of citizens, their ability to come together, to cooperate to
live better together, to organize themselves on their own territory, to
give power to people and not to money, to collectively share the wealth
produced while preserving common goods. It is urgent to ensure that this
period fraught with difficulties and threats becomes one of salutary
shock. (1) Available on the website www.pouruneautreeconomie.fr

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:956

There will be more than 1,500 people today in the large hall of the
Québec City Convention Centre for the Journée de l\'informatique du
Québec (JiQ). As usual, there will be conferences for everyone and two
blocks of workshops with more specialized content, with a new feature
this year called the Annex. An Annex, not to leave participants apart,
but to bring together young people from the world of information
technology (IT) in a different atmosphere based on the experiences of
bar camp, tweet camp or Web camp, popular with young people. It will
therefore be a lively area where \"the discussion will be focused on
specific topics such as free software, mobility, cloud computing and the
world of games,\" explains Bernard Cinq-Mars, head of programming. The
workshop is not offered to say whether free software is good or not,
whether it should be used or not, but to say how to do it, what are the
pitfalls to avoid. It will be the same for mobility and other topics,
because we are bringing together young people who have their hands in
the dough to say how we make a success with these practices.\" He adds
that it will not be a philosophical debate, but a discussion \> \> to
talk about results, successes, ways of resolving difficulties. We are
aiming for the practical. gaming component With the gaming component,
the people from Réseau Action TI are approaching a sector of IT that
seems to be a parallel world. However, in the world of gaming, IT is
used for other purposes. \"By mixing people from traditional IT and
those from the gaming world, we want to spark a debate around the use of
techniques, work methods and development of the two worlds.\" There will
be the workshop, but also the end-of-day conference in a large group
with the president of the Frima studio, Steve Couture, to talk about
\"gamification\" or ways of doing things to stimulate employee
performance, better expose a brand or make training more fun. For him,
the gaming world is not just for teenagers, but it can be interesting
for companies as a learning method. A first \"punch\" conference will be
presented by IBM with its Watson robot that played a historic game of
Jeopardy against humans. It will present what happens in the heart of
the supercomputer that uses advanced analytical technology. It will be
explained that Watson\'s ability to understand the meaning and context
of human language and to quickly process this information offers
enormous potential in different sectors. There will even be a stand to
put your knowledge to the test in front of Watson. AGILE Method The
workshops will focus on the Agile working method, cloud computing, open
data, integration architecture, telehealth, security, mobility and
software interoperability. At noon, journalist Sophie Langlois will show
the impact of social networks on democracy with her observations abroad,
particularly in Arab countries. ytherrien@lesoleil.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:957

IT Relocating the production of digital tablets to France, after having
started manufacturing them in China, was a bold move. For Jean-Yves
Hepp, founding president of Qooq, it was both a question of survival and
personal conviction. \"I wanted to prove to my children that it was
still possible to undertake and produce in this country,\" says
Jean-Yves Hepp. Tired of the difficulties encountered with his Chinese
suppliers (delivery delays, quality problems, etc.), Jean-Yves Hepp
started almost from scratch. \"To remain competitive as a manufacturer
in France, we rethought the entire architecture of our product,\" he
explains. He called on an industrial subcontractor, Eolane. The tablet
is manufactured in the latter\'s factory in Montceau-les-Mines (71).
\"We are making significant savings, particularly on logistics costs. We
have managed to offset the additional cost of labor,\" he says happily.
In the kitchen The result is there, with the Qooq tablet, like
\"cooking\" in English, the use for which it is primarily intended.
Unlike other tablets, Qooq is solid, easy to clean, and does not fear
water or oil\... a wipe with a sponge is enough! A strong argument for
using the 3,000 recipes put into images and videos by Qooq from your
hob. But will that be enough to convince consumers to pay 349 euros for
a tablet? \"Our economic model is based on two pillars: the tablet and
subscriptions, from 1.99 euros for one day to 99 euros per year,\"
explains Jean-Yves Hepp. Qooq\'s services are also accessible on any PC,
smartphone, tablet from the website and soon on most connected TVs.
Beyond recipes, culinary lexicon and sommelier advice, Qooq is full of
tips, such as creating a list of meals and friends or automatically
managing the shopping list adapted to the preparation of a recipe and
the number of guests. Finally, Qooq is not just a tablet. It also allows
you to surf the Internet, listen to the radio and should soon allow you
to watch TV, provided you convince the channels. More generally, Qooq
must attract developers: it is equipped with a not very widespread
operating system, Linux QT, but which has the advantage of being free
software. \"Qooq has a solid cash flow, which gives it the financial
means to achieve its ambitions,\" notes Olivier Goy, CEO of 123 Venture,
a fund that holds a third of Qooq\'s capital. \"We participated in the
three rounds of funding,\" he adds. \"The management is financially
committed, which is reassuring for investors.\", the company raised 8
million euros.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:958

This is a pivotal year for the Mont Blanc Meetings. Firstly, because the
5th edition will aim, among other things, to transform and reform the
Meetings themselves. The association wants to expand and extend its
platform to a more international scale by integrating more
representatives from other continents and by varying the locations where
the summits will be held from one edition to the next. Also pivotal
because this 2011 edition will take place on the eve of the Rio +20
Conference, which will capture the attention of the planet from 4 to 6
June 2012. Twenty years after the Rio Conference on the Environment,
where 178 governments adopted Agenda 21, the UN is returning to the
Brazilian metropolis to ensure global political commitment to
sustainable development. The two main themes of this conference will
focus on the green economy and the institutional framework necessary for
sustainable development. A model economy In Chamonix, starting November
9, there will be a lot of discussion on how to bring the social economy
as a model to this conference. \"For us, it is a fundamental issue to
demonstrate that the social economy is a complete model of sustainable
development,\" says Thierry Jeantet, president of the Rencontres du
Mont-Blanc, during a telephone interview with Le Devoir. Recalling that
the issue of sustainable development is broader than the ecological
question and that it is based on three \"pillars\" \-- economic, social
and ecological \-- he sees the social economy as an essential way of
doing things. \"Who can better combine these three pillars than the
social economy? I would say in fact that it is consubstantial to the
social economy to link these three pillars,\" he considers, regarding
this model which is based on a system of ownership that is both private
and collective, democratic management and a fair distribution of
surpluses. A scientific committee, led by Louis Favreau and Gérard
Boismenu, is currently working on drafting a report on the Mont Blanc
Meetings, which will be sent to nearly 200 heads of state before they
attend the Rio +20 Conference. \"It\'s an interesting text, because it
includes both an analysis and proposals for work and, as a result,
challenges to heads of state,\" explains Thierry Jeantet. At least 25
proposals will be at the heart of this report and will specify, among
other things, the importance of promoting a shared mode of governance, a
democratization of the economy and the means to feed the entire world
population. This report will be presented on November 10 and submitted
to the participants of the Mont Blanc Meetings, who will discuss it in
depth to make changes and approve it. \"Maybe it will be more than just
touch-ups. It\'s an open debate,\" acknowledges Thierry Jeantet. Towards
a dialogue There is a desire, therefore, to make contact with the
political world which is illustrated in this report, but also in the
programming of the Mont-Blanc Meetings, with the participation, among
others, of Inacio Lula da Silva, former president of Brazil, and Michel
Rocard, former French prime minister. In addition to politicians, the
Mont-Blanc Meetings will also attempt to challenge political and
administrative leaders, communities, unions and even certain companies
in the traditional economic sector. \"The social economy wants to
strengthen its partnerships,\" explains Thierry Jeantet, also general
director of the Euresa economic group. Dialogue is needed to move
forward. The social economy wants to present itself as a model, but it
does not want to be the only model, otherwise it would be dangerous. We
are in a plural world. What we want is for the social economy to take
its rightful place in this plural world, and therefore much more than it
has today.\" Because, for several years now, capitalism has no longer
reigned as an indisputable model. \"The nesting\" of several crises,
namely ecological, climatic, energy, food and financial, has proven its
limits and stimulated the search for \"other competing paths compared to
the traditional model, but which do not claim to be unique and dominant
paths\". If the problem of visibility of the social economy was posed as
one of the main challenges when the Rencontres du Mont-Blanc were
created in 2004, the situation has changed a lot since then, even if
more than ever the association feels the need to communicate, to
disseminate, to make itself known. \"We feel that there is an awareness
that, faced with the aging capitalist model, it is time to look at what
other paths can be taken. That is why it is urgent that the social
economy gives itself the means to dialogue\", insists the author of the
book L\'économie sociale, une alternative au capitalisme, published in
2008 by Economica. \"I think that the social economy must take its
rightful place in the commercial world \-- because it is a regulatory
element of a globalization that should become more human \-- and that it
must keep and develop its rightful place in the non-commercial world.
One of the characteristics of the social economy is that it is capable
of adapting to the challenges of both worlds. I think that it is
precisely the only model that is capable of managing this duality.\" In
his opinion, this dimension, both private and collective, of the social
economy makes it \"a very modern property system, which inspired those
who created free software, and which now inspires a reflection on free
seeds\" in agriculture. This free software, more often referred to by
its English name, OpenSource, will also be the subject of a conference
in the section devoted to Rio +20 during the Mont-Blanc Meetings.
Offered free of charge and easily accessible via the web, free software
represents, for Thierry Jeantet, a \"case of maximum shareable
property\", as well as \"a new form of social economy\". \"We must never
forget that one of the origins of the social economy is to give access
to the greatest number of people to products, services and means of
working.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:959

In his career, Steve Jobs has experienced everything: the hesitant
beginnings of the innovators of personal computing, the first successes
of the Lisa and the Macintosh, then a sort of crossing of the desert
when he left the company he had founded with Steve Wozniak and, finally,
the crowning glory of the return as boss of Apple with the series of
products that transformed the Cupertino company into the largest
computer company in the world. Financial success is here only the most
visible sign of a determining influence that has profoundly transformed
our culture. His death marks the beginning of the end of an era, that of
the first generation of nerds who will have changed the world with their
vision of personal computing, accessible to the greatest number. Among
these pioneers, Steve Jobs occupies a special place. By his
determination, his passion, and especially by his choices. These
choices, sometimes rightly contested, most often imitated, form a
considerable legacy that has contributed to the transformation of the
computer industry into an unsuspected cultural industry. Steve Jobs has
always stood out from his colleagues (we think here of Bill Gates and
Lawrence Ellison) by his conviction that elegance in computing is
neither accessory nor superfluous. On the contrary, style (or \"taste\",
to literally translate the taste that he often used when discussing the
specificity of his approach) is as important as the power of a machine
intended for personal use. The aesthetic choice is the common thread of
Steve Jobs\' career. After a now legendary visit to Xerox PARC in 1979,
he decided to adopt graphical interfaces for his computers. The
industrialization of these interfaces contributed greatly to the birth
of digital culture. Through its familiar metaphors, it popularized the
appearance of a simplicity that, by seducing users, made possible an
expansion of the field of computing to all activities: calculation,
certainly, but also word processing, image manipulation, etc. After
leaving Apple, he bought Pixar and founded NeXT. It was the late 1980s.
This last company, often considered a commercial failure, nevertheless
played a crucial role in Jobs\' career and in the history of digital
culture. NeXTStep was a system built on the basis of the BSD (Berkeley
System Distribution) variant of UNIX, but with a more refined graphical
interface. It was the first system designed both as a server and as a
personal machine. Thus the NeXT Cube was a computer already ready for
the network. It is therefore not surprising to see Tim Berners-Lee
propose and develop, in the wake of his innovations, his WorldWideWeb,
the first browser of what would become the Web on a NeXT. And that it is
this same NeXTStep that became the OS X that powers Apple machines
today. NeXTStep is paradigmatic of the Steve Jobs method: an
unprecedented fusion between components of the system from free software
and graphical interface elements, all controlled by a desire to offer
the user both a high-performance system and an elegant and orderly
environment. This blend of free software and control also characterizes
the way in which Apple changed the landscape of online music sales with
the introduction of the first iPods and iTunes. At a time when digital
rights management was all the rage after the Napster shock, iTunes
allowed for more open use and sharing than was desired by the music
industry. By offering a single price and allowing users to distribute a
file on five computers, Steve Jobs showed the viability of a more
flexible economic model, more open to the realities of daily Internet
use. This relative openness, unfortunately, was hampered by the need to
always go through the computer, a characteristic that survives to this
day with the iPhone and iPad. Steve Jobs never adhered to the spirit of
free software and open source and in practice, he even imposed the model
of a single store that became a rival to Amazon. In this context, he
embodied a new trend: that of opposing the cultural industries (film
producers, publishers), while trying to impose his own monopoly. The
economic model of Apple stores (iTunes, App Store and iBook) is now the
archetype of a digital cultural economy. One of Steve Jobs\' most
important contributions is undoubtedly another hybridization, more
radical and more important. It is that of mobile and touch. The first
iPods had transformed the experience of listening to music. But with the
introduction of the iPhone and then the iPad, it is our daily life that
has been reinvented. With the introduction of touch, it is indeed the
culture of the screen that has been radically transformed. The reader\'s
gaze is now associated with touch and tactile manipulation. Modifying an
image with one\'s fingers establishes a new era in our relationship with
the image. The reader and spectator functions are thus subject to new
possibilities that allow, through the body, to concretize desires and
wishes. Touch, in this context, signifies the passage towards a new
network that has its origins in gestures, because the body has become
the primary interface of all our communications. Communication and
knowledge, like the space of their production and reception, are now
subject to the constraints and promises of this new digital reality. For
the digital aesthete, Steve Jobs\' greatest influence will have been
this return of the body in our digital daily life, a return that has
transformed our habitus by modifying the work space, the public space
and the intimate space. A return that also signifies the emergence of
the new digital culture. If the latter was born from a culture of the
office and the chair, it has transformed since the iPhone, partly thanks
to Steve Jobs, into a traveling culture. This mutation is still in its
infancy, and it is largely the legacy that this visionary has left us.
For Steve Jobs, the decor was always right. He was the first to sense
that digital was neither a simple calculation technique nor a tool
reserved exclusively for work, but rather a human activity in its own
right, a space that men, women and children inhabit, cross and, as such,
shape as they please. He is one of the first architects of this emerging
human space that the digital community has just lost.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:960

So it was not an iPhone 5 that was announced yesterday evening at Apple
headquarters in Cupertino (California) by Tim Cook, the new CEO, during
the ritual keynote, but a 4S model, an evolution of the version released
in June 2010. \"Seven times faster\", an improved camera (8 megapixels),
a better connection (4G), nothing but highly anticipated for a new
technological object. The Apple company concluded with a demonstration
of Siri, an \"intelligent\" voice recognition software. \"What\'s the
weather like?\" The weather app launches. \"How many days until
Christmas?\" 82. Oddly enough, there was no wave. Despite everything,
this iPhone 4S will sell. By the truckload, probably. But the strong
points that made Apple\'s phone a unique object are now often present in
the competition. Some could even turn into weaknesses. The design Before
the release of the first iPhone in June 2007, what was already called
the mobile Internet was above all a fantasy. Smartphone models already
existed, but none offered intuitive web browsing. Jonathan Ive, Apple\'s
chief designer, who already designed the iMac G3 (the translucent ball)
and the iPod, managed to imagine the device that would allow you to
carry the Internet in your pocket: no keyboard and a single large,
particularly responsive multitouch touchscreen. A first, and a
phenomenal success. Yes, but the competition eventually caught up. It
was far from easy, and manufacturers spent a long time looking for their
bearings, but beasts like the Galaxy SII from Samsung or the Sensation
from HTC no longer have much to envy the iPhone. The operating system In
itself, iOS, which runs the iPhone, is a great success. The interface is
fluid, intuitive, and responds perfectly to touch. It may not seem like
much, but Apple\'s perfectionism in this area is unmatched in creating
an obvious tactile relationship between the user and the machine. Yes,
but: iOS is a black box, a system that is as closed as possible. It\'s
hard to do worse in this area. And what may seem annoying when it comes
to a computer becomes a real concern when we\'re talking about the
object that will end up containing the lives of its users
(communications of all types, social networks, cultural content,
travel). Is it reasonable to have blind trust in a phone manufacturer,
even with an Apple? Not sure. The discovery of the storage of the
movements of an iPhone user recently showed this. Android, developed by
Google, which must manage many more constraints, in particular the
diversity of machines on which it must run, still does not compete with
iOS on many points. But it is free and open source (its computer code is
public). A bit more reassuring. Apps and games Finding your car in the
parking lot? Calculate the energy intake of your breakfast? There is an
iPhone application for almost any real or superfluous need. Apple\'s
download platform, the AppStore, has grown exponentially and offers more
than 500,000 mini-software. Two thirds are paid, but sold at a low price
(often 79 euro cents) which encourages compulsive buying. The AppStore
has above all an impressive catalog of games (about 20% of the total)
against which Android cannot compete. The Android Market\'s game library
is indeed much more dismal. Yes, but: Apple exercises very strict
control over its application market. While adding an app to Android is
only a formality, each candidate for the AppStore must submit its
program to Apple\'s editorial police and then wait several days before
obtaining (or not) the precious authorization. Applications deemed
\"inappropriate\" (insults, nudity, or any other criteria) are ousted.
We also remember some unfortunate refusals due to competition with
in-house services, such as the voice over IP app Google Voice,
blackballed for having, Apple argues, \"reproduced capabilities offered
by \[its\] phone\". Never without iTunes It is the symbol of Apple\'s
connected ecosystem. The software allows you to manage all the content
on your phone (music, videos, books, apps, podcasts). And, despite being
a rare heaviness, it is rather practical, especially when you are a
regular consumer on the iTunes Store, the online store. Yes, but: the
user has no choice and must go through iTunes to manage their phone. It
is impossible to take advantage of the available gigabytes as they wish,
as with any USB key. And anyone who has ever tried to synchronize their
music library with more than one computer at a time will have painful
memories of it. Apple takes refuge behind ease of use. The consumer
should not ask himself any questions. It is certain that we are less
likely to get lost when we are on a leash.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:961

To understand the meaning of the acronym P2P, you must first know that
in a \"traditional\" computer network, the information sought (websites,
social networks, etc.) is concentrated in \"servers\", at the center of
a spider\'s web that connects them to our personal computers, which are
\"clients\". The acronym P2P comes from the English expression peer to
peer. It designates a different type of network where each personal
computer is both a client and a server. When you search in a P2P
network, you search through all the computers that are part of it,
yours, ours and your brother-in-law\'s. No need to leave the house to
borrow a CD from the neighbor and then copy it, you just have to find
the coveted file among the members of the network and download it. And
that\'s where BitTorrent comes in. This is called a \"protocol,\" a set
of rules that allow you to break a file into small packets of bits, like
a puzzle. Instead of downloading the whole puzzle from a single source,
you take a piece here, another there. The volume is thus distributed
across the network instead of being concentrated at a single point.
There are dozens of BitTorrent programs, and they can be used for
perfectly legitimate purposes, such as distributing free software or
public documents.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:962

Downloading pirated copies of movies wasn\'t very dangerous in Canada
until now, but that\'s no longer the case. A judge has authorized, for
the first time, a movie producer to obtain the identities of Bell,
Videotron and Cogeco customers who downloaded his movie The Hurt Locker.
On August 29, Federal Court Judge Michael J. Shore ordered the three
companies to provide the names and addresses of their customers that
correspond to about thirty IP addresses identified by Voltage Pictures
LLC. The company demonstrated in court that the owners of these
addresses had downloaded these copies using a P2P (peer-to-peer)
network. While this decision is a first in Canada, it\'s not the first
time that Voltage and a few other production companies have attacked the
exchange of pirated copies. Over the past two years, a dozen cases have
been filed in American courts, targeting nearly 140,000 individuals to
date. Their strategies follow a certain pattern. Once the studios have
obtained the identities of the Internet users, they receive a letter
saying that it has been discovered that one or more copies of films have
been downloaded illegally. They are then asked to pay between \$1,000
and \$1,500 immediately, or \$2,500 after a certain deadline. If the
case goes to court, it is threatened, the sums claimed could reach
\$30,000 per film, or even more if it is proven that the Internet user
acted intentionally. So far, the courts have not gone that far, but the
penalties can still reach more than \$1,000 per file. We have not yet
reached that stage in our country, since Voltage Pictures has only just
obtained the identities it requested. We will soon see how the company
intends to discourage consumers from using sharing networks to exchange
copies illegally. In the decision rendered in Montreal, Judge Shore
believes that \"defendants should not be able to hide behind the
anonymity of the Internet and continue to violate the copyright of
Voltage Pictures LLC.\" This decision is causing concern among some
observers, but not because they have anything to hide from. Daniel
Pascot, director of the department of organizational information systems
at Université Laval and president of the association FACIL (Pour
l\'appropriation collective de l\'informatique libre), sees it as a
danger for access to information. Control of information \"They are
giving corporations powers that are currently reserved for judges and
police officers, and they are the ones who will control the flow of
information. It is dangerous for our freedoms.\" Anything that
undermines the neutrality of the Internet and allows companies to
control information is problematic, according to him. \"The industry
wants to create all sorts of digital blocks and locks that risk making
us dependent on proprietary software. We will no longer be able to
choose the software we want to access documents, and the software that
is imposed on us does things we don\'t want.\" On this subject, he cites
the case of Amazon. \"If I use their tools to read a book and I
underline passages, Amazon is informed\... If I send emails where I talk
about certain products, I strangely see advertisements for these
products appear on the pages I visit. We are constantly being spied
on.\" The professor examines all these questions related to intellectual
property in a course, Free Software and Societies, which he has offered
to everyone since 2005 in an original format that allows the public to
attend freely. The course is given every Monday at 6:30 p.m. (room 2307,
Palasis-Prince building, or online). The next session is precisely on
the legal dimension. passelin@lesoleil.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:963

TodaysArt, at least it\'s clear. Not the art of the day before yesterday
that grandpa likes, but that of today or, more precisely, \"of the day\"
as they say of a dish. So not necessarily that of tomorrow. A modest
art, in the making, where we put our hands to the dough, to share. It
was last week in The Hague (Netherlands) for the seventh edition of this
cutting-edge festival, it\'s for the first time in Brussels this
weekend. Dance, electronic music, theater, performances, conferences,
films, interactive installations. Common pot. At night, on the square of
the ultramodern town hall of The Hague, the scene was quite similar to
another, painted and enclosed in the Mauritshuis museum not far from
there, a typically Dutch winter landscape by Hendrick Avercamp, On the
Ice (circa 1610), an urban party where all social classes mingle and
fall backwards while skating on a lake. We said to ourselves that we
would never see this in France. Never this idea of community art, not in
the sense of what we \"have\" in common but of what we \"put\" into the
common pot to live better together. Protestant culture versus Catholic
culture. Containers transformed into express bookstores, places to
exchange clothes and shoes, long paper beaches where everyone is invited
to \"invent\" their own The Hague through words, drawings and collages.
An innocent wrote in the center of the fresco \"more philosophers\",
parodying Rembrandt\'s one with three sticks. Other visitors (young,
that\'s what\'s striking) test the inflatable habitat of Raumlabor, a
re-edition of a performance from the 70s. How do you stand there, how do
you sit there, what kinds of conversations do strangers have there? Next
door, near the fountain, Dus Architects has installed a structure made
entirely of umbrellas. All over the walls, art school students and
interventionist artists are setting up giant, moving projections. On one
of them, SMSlingshot by VR/Urban, viewers are invited to shoot an
electronic slingshot that draws patterns on the wall. We don't discuss
art. We do it, we exchange ways of seeing the world not through words
but physically, through gestures. Even the cinema of TodaysArt (Saving
the World by the British Gob Squad, which will not be shown in Brussels)
comes out of a kind of feel-good movie invisible in France: instead of
rejoicing in its navel (its couple, its family, its friends), Saving the
World randomly fishes passers-by on the Market Square in The Hague and
questions them about their age, their loves, their beliefs, trying to
establish in a comic-pragmatic way the list of things to \"save\" in the
event of the end of the world. The observation is bittersweet, terribly
human, the result is a bit reminiscent of Varda\'s \"documenters\", so
incredibly open to others. Physical involvement, more than digital art
(which is nevertheless omnipresent), characterizes TodaysArt. Among the
crowd of shows and concerts on offer that we will find in Brussels,
there are superstars such as Hiroaki Umeda and his performance Holistic
Strata (which has toured a lot in France) where the dancer, bombarded
with visual particles, becomes both the toy and the organizer of his
spatial environment, or the Mexican musician Murcof and his mental
mixes. Among the perlouzes to listen to, the Toulouse duo Plapla Pinky
of Maxime Denuc and Raphaël Hénard, who play the vinyl turntable and the
mixing desk as if it were a drum kit, sweating and imprinting their big
electro-industrial sound with the spasms of their bodies. In the same
order of guts, the Quebecer Martin Messier gives a sound and light
concert by connecting a series of sewing machines for grandmothers to
audio processing software and, activating them himself in real time, he
produces a rather astonishing concrete dance. \"Guérilla\". The final
part of TodaysArt, architecture-performance, which gave rise to a series
of screenings and conferences in The Hague. The films will not be shown
this weekend, but the theory will be put into practice in a more lasting
way than in the Netherlands. This concerned in particular a series of
documentaries by Gordon Matta-Clark (1943-1978), a tutelary figure of
architecture as performance, a specialist in cutting up buildings (he
got kicked out of his architecture school after presenting as his final
project an action consisting of breaking the windows of a room in situ)
and the recovery of materials that he compares to ingredients in cooking
recipes. In Brussels, we will find one of the champions of the
performance movement, Lisbon\'s Pedro Gadanho, in a conference. Gadanho
calls on architects to take back the streets and does not hesitate to
give performance architecture the mission of supporting European social
movements, from the Spanish indignados to the youth of French cities,
even seeing in the burned cars the distant echo of Matta-Clark\'s
actions. He explains this in various texts published online: \"While
governments abandon the streets and other infrastructures, while
contemporary architecture has become a market object, it is time for
architects to assume their incestuous links with art and explore, as
some already do, the critical legacy of performance.\" And to specify
that a whole generation of architects (including the Germans of
Raumlabor and the French collective Exyst, present in Brussels) are now
inspired by performance by devoting themselves to \"transitory urban
actions and to the service of the community rather than to monuments
erected to the power in place.\" This is ultimately a fairly close
description of what is happening at TodaysArt 2011 (subtitled \"jump
into the void\"): intervention, hacktivism, open source culture. In \"an
atmosphere of social guerrilla warfare,\" Gadanho adds, it must be
admitted that society will never be without conflict, that the great
reconciliation will not take place: in art as elsewhere, \"form will
have to take into account not only fiction, but also friction.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:964

Inexpensive and effective, this is the common point of a series of
technological projects that will be presented during a day open to the
public, in Paris, during the Open World Forum, Saturday September 24.
This conference, centered on free or open source software, does not
forget the hardware that can also obey the principles of freedom of use,
modification and diffusion. The company Hackable-Devices thus markets an
educational kit, ExpEyes, developed for Indian schoolchildren. For less
than 100 euros, teachers have a system and software that allows them to
do more than fifty experiments based on electronic, acoustic or
mechanical measurements. Two French high schools have already launched
projects using this tool that students could use at home. In the same
educational and philosophical vein, Pollux\'nz City is another product
of Hackable-Devices, which allows you to create an atmospheric
observation station. Five sensors record concentrations of carbon
monoxide, nitrogen dioxide, fine particles, and noise and temperature
levels. Wireless transmission allows this data to be shared on the Web.
The power consumption of the device, supported by the Ile-de-France
region, has been reduced. The Jerrycan project
(Youandjerrycan.tumblr.com) is the result of a meeting between an
electronics start-up and a design school. It offers simple ways to
deploy computer servers at a lower cost with consumer equipment in areas
that are not equipped. The set, which won an award at the Humanitech
humanitarian and technological competition, fits in a jerrycan and can
be enhanced with new functions.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:965

\"It\'s not important to understand everything she says, you just have
to follow her and the magic happens,\" my less-than-new economist
husband had warned me, completely captivated by this flirtatious fairy
whose magic wand is a smartphone. Follow her, I\'d be happy to, but
where? Louise Guay is both on Earth and in orbit, capable of exploring
dimensions where the imagination colludes with the most complex
databases. I\'d need 3D glasses. This pioneer in many fields,
particularly those involving virtual technologies, is starting her
second year as an entrepreneur in residence at CIRANO (a breeding ground
for 180 professors in research in various fields, economic, social and
legal). Her position, created from scratch, is quite unusual, the fruit
of her connections, her credibility in the field and a doctorate in
multimedia communications obtained in Paris after a bachelor\'s degree
in philosophy. Perhaps also because there is a kinship between these
researchers in their bubble and this beautiful ethereal who only sleeps
five hours a night. Louise Guay\'s role? To build a bridge between
research that often leads to nothing concrete and the field, real needs
and other pieces of the urban puzzle. Her title? Social entrepreneur, a
bit like Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg is, in spite of himself.
\"Academics are easy to find,\" economist Claude Montmarquette, director
of CIRANO, told me. \"Louises are rarer\... She is passionate, as are
the researchers, that\'s what brings us together. Classical scientific
models are no longer suitable; you have to solicit everyone\'s opinion
to develop a project. And social media has changed the situation. Louise
has the patience to make connections.\" Relayer, brewer of ideas, free
thinker with contagious dynamism, the performer fascinated me at the
last congress of economists of Quebec, where I was invited to joke about
social networks. Louise Guay presented her Living Lab, a permanent
construction site without orange cones, of which she is president in
Montreal. In front of me, a formidable speaker, but also a radar for new
things that has its entries everywhere, even at MIT (Massachusetts
Institute of Technology), ten years ahead of its time. The Living Lab,
an open-air laboratory Her playground resembles the city and life. \"The
complexity of today\'s world requires the use of socialized
technology,\" she explains. She uses strange expressions: open source,
open economics, open data, crowdsourcing (the wisdom of crowds), but
also \"green innovation\" and \"open innovation.\" She is surrounding
herself with digital natives to develop her Bixiwiki multimodal trip
planner, which would allow users to coordinate, for example, an
incentive parking spot, their car at Communauto and/or the Bixi at their
fingertips. And she is convinced that what sets the tone, well before
TV, social media, cinema or books, is gamification, the key element of
the concept. It is through gamification \-- the transfer of game
mechanisms to other areas, websites, work or social networks \-- that we
will probably solve the problem of nasal congestion on the road network.
All those years of banning your children from the PlayStation, only to
finally realize that they may be the ones who hold the solution in their
hands. Her Bixiwiki pilot project is moving forward and is in its second
phase: bringing together Bixi users to find solutions to problems such
as the distribution of bicycles through virtual gaming. \"We realize
that we need to come together to solve the planet\'s problems. We are
moving from an era where secrecy was the rule to an era of sharing. If
the 20th century was one of competition, symbolized by Monopoly, the
21st will be one of collaboration, as in the online multiplayer
role-playing game The World of Warcraft,\" she says, giving me the
example of an Ontario gold mine that was supposed to close and found an
additional eight million ounces by promising a \$500,000 reward and
opening up its data. 1,400 companies, universities and consultants
participated in the real game. Tired of playing in their own corners,
Équiterre, the Agence métropolitaine de transport, the Réseau
d\'innovation sociale du Québec and the City of Montreal are all
partners of the Living Lab. Montreal has even been working for a year to
open up its databases and make them accessible to everyone. "Let's take
the 5,000 Bixi bikes that leave from point A to clog up the stations at
point B (usually downtown) in the morning," Claude Faribault, research
director at the Living Lab, explains to me. "How can we redistribute the
bikes in the network without using trucks? The current system doesn't
make much sense from an ecological point of view! And New York will have
the same problem with its 10,000 Bixi bikes!" Users who happily play
Farmville, Smartville or The Sims would enter a large collaborative game
to solve a real problem by being given missions, points, promotions and
rewards. Taxis could turn the bikes over during their trips and kill two
birds with one stone, for a bonus. "Let's not forget that the gaming
industry is bigger than the music industry," Louise says. "When you grow
up, you give up gaming to become a serious, working adult." People who
continue to play, explore while having fun and who have fun, tend to
innovate.\" Playing to collaborate Louise has always played, she set up
\"My Virtual Mannequin\" which allows you to try on clothes in 3D using
your photo, without having to move. She surrounds herself with young
virtual game programmers, social actors who redesign the city with her.
And since the City of Montreal is open to citizen projects, the fluidity
of ideas is much greater than that of the road network. \"Imagination is
a fundamental resource, totally ecological!\" she marvels. Halfway
between A Beautiful Mind, La belle verte and Inception, Louise\'s world
gallops at the speed of a click. If she plays seriously, her love of
movement allows her to be ahead of the fray. And to untangle the skein
of wool for us. \"I show most of my work to children,\" she admits. They
really say what they think and are not complacent, in addition to being
logical. Children are not afraid of answers or asking the right
questions.\" Not everyone has his courage and few display as much
audacity. Playing is not always child\'s play. \*\*\*
cherejoblo@ledevoir.com Twitter.com/cherejoblo \*\*\* And the zests
Recouru: to the site Zonecone.ca, the initiative of a citizen who gave
us the immense gift of grouping together all the current road
construction sites in Quebec to plan our trips and avoid traffic jams.
Like GoogleMap, we enter point A and point B and the site takes care of
informing us of the route to take. The data was already public, Stéphane
Guidoin made it more fun. Contact: e-180.com, a brand new group of
individuals who exchange their neurons for free, over a coffee, on a
subject that fascinates them. From baby food to quantum cryptology, no
interest is overlooked. Collaborative mentoring in the form of bartering
and which calls upon the wisdom of crowds! Discovered: the Mur Mitoyen,
a collaborative calendar that brings together all cultural and civic
activities, scientific conferences in universities and which allows you,
thanks to geolocation, to know what is happening near you. 500
organizers publish events in 700 locations in the Montreal region. And
you can be informed according to your particular interests.
www.murmitoyen.com. Liked: Omar m\'a tuer, the excellent film that Odile
Tremblay told us about on Wednesday, conducted in the form of an
investigation by a writer. I wondered if we could have found additional
clues and saved this North African gardener from prison, using virtual
game methods\... The true story of Omar Raddad is a real nightmare,
rendered with great sensitivity by the actor Sami Bouajila. The film is
a plea against racism, judicial laxity, even its errors and its double
standards. At a time when Jacques Chirac and DSK are facing justice with
a certain complacency, one can indeed come out of this film disturbed.
\*\*\* The Angélil Bridge There are days, like that, when I dream of a
new bridge to replace Champlain. A golden bridge. We could ask \"Réné\"
to send us a billion? He finances medicine well (a chair in ENT
oncology), why not PPP transportation? A bridge with pink neon lights
that would shine at night like in Vegas. And it would be a toll bridge,
with half of the \"donations\" going to financing infrastructure, and
the other half to the Céline Dion Foundation. Do you have better ideas?
Feel free to share them. http://blogues.chatelaine.com/blanchette

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:966

INTERNET Former vice president of PayPal, Reid Hoffman, 44, is a key
figure in Silicon Valley. He was the first to invest in Facebook,
alongside Peter Thiel, in 2004. His most recent investments include
Ping.fm, Zynga and Grouply. LE FIGARO. - What is LinkedIn\'s founding
project? Reid HOFFMAN. - I\'m always looking for major trends. When I
started thinking about LinkedIn, in 2001-2002, I saw two. The first is
that the world of work is changing. All over the world, lifetime
employment is disappearing and each individual is responsible for
developing their own skills, in a connected world. The second was the
rise of the Internet. As a result, LinkedIn is the platform that allows
each person who needs to develop themselves to show who they are, who
they work with, and to access other experiences and skills. We\'re still
in the early stages of implementing this vision. Right now, people see
LinkedIn as a way to connect with others and find experts. We\'re not at
the point where people are thinking about how to invest in themselves,
how to be more effective. Today, everyone Googles names and everyone can
be found on Google. What people don\'t realize yet is that they can make
their professional profile the first thing people see. How do you see
the social media world evolving? The existence of other networks has
been good for us. But people still think they\'re choosing to
participate when we\'re already in a networked world. The question is,
how are we going to navigate this world intelligently? Today, Facebook
is the backyard barbecue. Twitter is the media. LinkedIn is the office.
There is room for other networks, but the offering has to be both broad
and unique. There are broad categories like religion or sports that are
not occupied. I think there will be a big player that we don\'t know
about yet that will have emerged within five years. Do you see Google+
as a potential competitor? Google+ is a good social product. The
question is: how will it create differentiation? It is not yet a
competitor to LinkedIn. It could go in that direction, but it is not
certain. To serve the professional market, you have to be specialized.
LinkedIn Today provides information from professional sources. A circle
with your work colleagues does not allow you to go to that level of
specificity. Also, context is important: what do you see on your screen?
What do you think of the valuations of Internet companies today? Is
there a bubble? Valuations are a tricky subject. It is about net worth
based on what you think the future will be. My point of view is that
social networks are fundamental phenomena that will change the world,
yes. But as for the numbers, I let the markets decide. There is a bubble
if the prediction is wrong, but I defend the idea that the change is
very profound. These networks produce data and trade in it. Isn\'t that
a problem? In the case of LinkedIn, the use of data turns to the
advantage of our users. It is not a question of the location of Internet
users or photos of their children but rather of knowing which skills are
trendy, etc. Users cannot feel taken aback by this use of data. When we
have a technological transformation, people are slow to recognize that
massive transparency is good for them. Internet users will discover that
moving towards more openness and transparency is beneficial for them. We
are rarely questioned on our practices and always act quickly. We must
maintain trust. LinkedIn allows companies to determine their strategy
according to their recruitment. Can this pose problems with their
competitors? When a company posts a job offer, it puts as much detail as
possible to attract the best profile. We can already get a lot of
information from this data. But we have to look at the counterpart: a
company wants us to know in which sector it is recruiting to build the
best teams. For its investors, it can also be good to know in which
direction it is going. So there is more value in being open and
transparent. Finally, for us, the interest of the individual will always
come before that of the company. We want our users to have a positive
experience. Personally, you invest in many start-ups very early on,
including Facebook and Zynga. What is your strategy? I look at three
things when I invest: marketplaces - which led me to invest recently in
Airbnb -, networks - Zynga is a gaming network - and platforms - like
Shopkick. It is also important that there is no conflict of interest
with my activities at LinkedIn. For example, I am on the board of
directors of Zynga, but not of Facebook. It's helpful because I see
common trends on both sides, parallels that are used in my investments
as well as in my work at LinkedIn. Where do you see the next big
technological breakthrough coming from? I'm keeping a close eye on the
open source hardware space.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:967

A comfortable and anonymous building in the heart of Washington, a few
blocks from the White House. In a row of offices at the back of the 5th
floor, about twenty young people, mostly boys, work discreetly, in an
atmosphere that is both studious and relaxed. This small team, made up
of computer scientists, lawyers and sociologists, is in the process of
realizing the supreme utopia of hackers and libertarian activists the
world over: software that will allow the creation of 100% autonomous
high-speed wireless networks that will operate on Wi-Fi frequencies,
without relying on any existing infrastructure - no telephone relays, no
cables, no satellites. They will be mobile, horizontal, entirely
decentralized and will escape all surveillance, because the traffic will
be anonymous and encrypted. This ambitious project - codenamed
Commotion - is led by Sascha Meinrath, 37, a long-time activist for the
free Internet and a pioneer of citizen networks - within the collective
of online journalists Indymedia, then at the University of
Urbana-Champaign (Illinois), one of the cradles of free software, and in
various start-ups and social action NGOs: \"I cobbled together my first
autonomous network ten years ago. The antennas were made from tin
cans.\" Since those heroic days, Sascha Meinrath has come a long way. In
its current incarnation, Commotion is a very official project. It is
hosted and funded by the Open Technology Initiative (OTI), the high-tech
department of the New America Foundation, a prestigious organization
dedicated to studying the major problems of American society, and
chaired by Eric Schmidt, one of the bosses of Google. Thanks to this
tutelage, Sascha Meinrath has an annual budget of 2.3 million dollars
(1.6 million euros), to which has been added an exceptional subsidy of 2
million, granted by the State Department. Indeed, American diplomats are
very interested in the technology of autonomous wireless networks, light
and easy to install. They hope to deploy them soon on the ground in
various emergency situations: in zones devastated by war or natural
disaster; in the most deprived regions of the planet, where populations
are deprived of modern means of communication; and, finally, as a
\"circumvention tool\" in dictatorial countries, to help political
dissidents communicate with each other and with the rest of the world,
by thwarting police surveillance and censorship. \"At the end of 2010,\"
recalls Sascha Meinrath, \"I learned somewhat by chance that the State
Department had decided to support this type of research. We applied, in
competition with other organizations, and we were chosen. Other projects
relied partly on existing infrastructure, while Commotion bypasses it
entirely.\" The federal grant wasn\'t enough to turn the Commotion team
into civil servants. Josh King, 28, the technical manager, has kept his
very rebellious look - dressed head to toe in black, with a chain,
piercing and messy hair. His office is cluttered with all sorts of
devices, which he does extensive testing on, because Commotion must be
able to work with a disparate assembly. Its software transforms an
ordinary Wi-Fi router, a simple PC or a smartphone into intelligent
relays, capable of knowing in real time the configuration of the
network, and sorting the data to send it to its destination, or to
another relay, closer to the destination. Moreover, Commotion can be
easily connected to the rest of the world: just one of the devices needs
to be connected to the Internet and all the others benefit from access.
\"In fact,\" King says, \"the only essential tool to bring into the
field is a USB stick with the software, which must be installed on each
device that will be part of the network.\" Since spring 2011, OTI has
been offering parts of Commotion as a free download on the Internet. A
full working version will be available in September, so that experts
from all countries can study it and make suggestions. Sascha Meinrath is
not sure who is downloading what, because he does not keep track of who
visits the site: \"If we kept a list of our visitors, our servers could
be hacked by different governments - including our own.\" Recently, OTI
has received messages from \"Arab Spring\" activists living in Egypt,
Syria, Libya, Bahrain and Yemen: \"They want to get Commotion, but we
are trying to dissuade them. It is too early, it is not secure, it would
be risky to use it against a repressive regime.\" That said, it may be
that clandestine groups are already using provisional versions without
telling us. Some of the people we talk to are perhaps agents in the
service of dictatorships, but it doesn\'t matter, we\'re showing the
same thing to everyone.\" Sascha Meinrath has given himself until the
end of 2012 to produce a version that can be used by the general public.
To move faster, OTI is appropriating systems developed by other teams.
For security, Commotion will integrate the programs of the TOR project
(The Onion Router), invented by a group of German and American hackers
to circulate on the Internet while avoiding detection. TOR was notably
used to protect the communications of the WikiLeaks site - which in 2010
disclosed masses of secret documents belonging to the United States
government. One of the creators of TOR, the American Jacob Appelbaum,
was very close to the WikiLeaks team for a time. Twice in 2010, he was
arrested by the American police, who questioned him about his activities
within WikiLeaks and seized his phones and computers. Jacob Appelbaum is
also a personal friend of Sascha Meinrath, who called on him as an
advisor for the development of Commotion. To explain this paradoxical
situation, Sascha Meinrath speaks of the \"schizophrenia\" of the
federal government: \"Among the officials in Washington, there are still
people trained during the Cold War, who dream of blocking and monitoring
everything, but there are also young people who arrived with Obama, who
are in favor of transparency and freedom of expression. In private, many
State Department officials were angry to see their superiors criticize
WikiLeaks so violently. According to them, the affair could have been an
opportunity to show the world that the United States knows how to defend
freedom of expression and transparency, in all circumstances. » Now,
Jacob Appelbaum is involved in a large project called Freedom Box - a
basic, inexpensive computer that has been transformed into an encrypted
and secure server for the general public. Sascha Meinrath is considering
integrating Freedom Box into the Commotion network, in particular to
benefit from a so-called \"delayed connection\" function: \"For example,
during a demonstration that is repressed by the police, a demonstrator
takes a photo with a smartphone connected to Commotion. The Internet was
cut off that day in the neighborhood by the authorities, the photo
cannot leave the country, but thanks to Commotion, it is stored safely
on a local Freedom Box. Then, as soon as the Internet is restored, the
box automatically sends the photo worldwide. » OTI is considering
integrating other experimental devices, which will allow users to share
large amounts of large files, to route phone calls made with ordinary
mobiles over Commotion, to transmit data in all frequency ranges, and
even to interconnect several neighboring networks: \"In July,\" says
Sascha Meinrath, \"a team of hackers in a van set up an ephemeral
network, covering an area of 60 km by 30, straddling Austria, Croatia
and Slovenia. This is proof that you can provide an Internet connection
to an entire border area, without being physically present in the
country.\" Commotion is not ready for deployment in risk areas, but it
can already be tested in the United States - for example, in poor
neighborhoods of large cities, whose residents cannot afford a
traditional Internet subscription. In Washington, Detroit, and on a
Californian Indian reservation, OTI has made contact with neighborhood
associations and activist groups that have undertaken to create wild
wireless networks to offer residents free Internet access. With its
expertise and its address book, the OTI team has provided these amateurs
with crucial technical and financial assistance. This time, the
potential enemies are the telecom companies, which could put pressure on
the authorities to kill these citizen initiatives with laws and
bureaucratic restrictions. Sascha Meinrath is aware of the threat: \"Our
technology will shake up a lot of things, including in the United
States. If people start building their own networks, the business model
of the telecom groups will collapse. We must expect them to
counterattack brutally.\" Commotion will also have to face the hostility
of the Hollywood majors, because it can facilitate the piracy of
copyrighted works. Sascha Meinrath is both fatalistic and optimistic:
\"Whether in the United States, the Middle East or elsewhere, who will
set up these alternative networks? Not old people, we know that. It\'s
teenagers who will take hold of them. They will use them to challenge
the established order and also to share their music and films. It may be
negative for the rights holders, but the overall balance sheet will be
very positive.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:968

GUIDE It\'s not easy to equip yourself properly with computer equipment
when you\'re a penniless student. Especially in this period of
austerity\... So it\'s time to take advantage of promotions and special
operations offered by sellers and manufacturers. But also to be smart
about finding good deals, original and little-known. Computer
miniprixThe student microportable operation, launched by the government
in 2004, no longer exists. But other avenues are worth exploring. First,
on the manufacturers\' side. HP is offering its Pavilion g7-1 100 laptop
at 399 euros (1). On the menu: 17-inch screen, 4 GB of memory, 640 GB
disk, all running Windows 7. At Dell, the Student EPP program allows you
to benefit from discounts. For example, the Inspirion 15R laptop
(15-inch screen, Intel Core i5, 6 GB of memory) is at 599 euros. Apple
has the same policy: the MacBook Air is less than 900 euros for students
and the MacBook Pro starts at 1,079 euros. As a bonus, there is a
\"University Gift Card\" that allows you to buy items for 75 euros on
all Apple online stores. Distributors are also taking advantage of the
start of the school year to lower the prices of certain models. On the
Rueducommerce, Cdiscount, Pixmania sites, you can find a number of
branded laptops (Toshiba, Samsung, Lenovo, Acer, etc.) between 300 and
600 euros. Finally, if the prospect of investing in reconditioned
equipment does not scare you, you will find computers at unbeatable
prices at the partners of the Ordi 2.0 program (www.ordi2-0.fr),
launched under the aegis of the Ministry of the Digital Economy. Tablet
on saleHP is doing badly. This summer, the manufacturer decided to
separate from its IT division. As a result, it is selling off several
products, including its flagship tablet, the TouchPad (2), which is
going from 399 to\... 99 euros for the 16 GB version! Fast and clever,
this 10-inch tablet, which physically resembles the iPad, is aimed
primarily at hyperconnected people with its direct access to Facebook,
Twitter and Flickr. It plays Flash animations without any problem,
offers a large-format Azerty virtual keyboard and recharges wirelessly,
by induction. The only drawback: the absence of a camera on the back and
a video player limited to MPEG4 files. Please note: the promotion only
applies to current stocks, at Fnac, Darty, etc. There won\'t be enough
for everyone! Cheap printerPrinters are getting cheaper and cheaper, but
manufacturers are making up for it with ink cartridges, which provide
them with a regular income. A good way to save money is to print as much
as possible in draft mode and double-sided. The best deal right now is
the Epson Stylus SX130 (3), which is a printer, scanner and photocopier,
sold for only 39.24 euros on Pixmania.fr. The same site also offers the
Canon Pixma MX410, which is more photo-oriented and can be used as a
fax, for 69 euros. At Rueducommerce, the HP OfficeJet Wi-Fi
multifunction printer is back at 29.90 euros with a refund offer\...
Free softwareIn most cases, computers come with some more or less useful
software, but rarely with software that is used for work. Rather than
spending hundreds of euros to equip yourself, adopt free software that
is at least as effective as paid software. At the top of the list, the
LibreOffice suite (like OpenOffice.org) for Mac, Windows and Linux,
available for download on fr.libreoffice.org, provides the same
functions as Microsoft Office. No complicated registration procedure and
full compatibility with Word, Excel and PowerPoint. To create PDF files
from any Windows application (standard on Mac), download PDFCreator from
pdfforge.fr. To play any video format on Mac, Windows and Linux, install
VLC for free from videolan.org. To organize your photos on PC, use
Picasa (picasa.google.com). And to edit them, download PhotoFiltre for
Windows (photofiltre.com) or Seashore for Mac
(seashore.sourceforge.net). Choose Audacity to edit and convert audio
files on Mac, Windows and Linux (audacity.sourceforge.net). Finally, on
PC, think about cleaning and security utilities like Ccleaner, Cobian
Backup, avast!, SpyBot Search&Destroy, ZoneAlarm, etc. All free and easy
to use. Accessible accessoriesTo complete your equipment, you can go for
inexpensive peripherals and accessories. For example, an external hard
drive, such as the Freecom Mobile Drive XXS 640 GB, sold for 59.30 euros
on Cdiscount, the Kingston DataTraveler G3 16 GB USB key for 17 euros at
Pixmania or the Altec Lansing BXR 1221 2.1 speakers for 19.90 euros (4)
on Rueducommerce. Also a good deal on the same site, the pack of two
Netgear AV+ 200 Mbps CPL adapters (5) for 49.90 euros instead of 129
euros. ¢

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:969

It was at 4:35 a.m. US time on Monday, August 15, that Google announced
the acquisition of American mobile phone manufacturer Motorola Mobility.
Larry Page, co-founder and CEO of Google, announced the news on the
Mountain View company\'s blog: \"I am excited to announce that we are
acquiring Motorola.\" While Mr. Page did not specify the cost of the
operation, Motorola will take care of it: \$12.5 billion (€8.6 billion),
or \$40 per share. A premium of more than 63% compared to Motorola\'s
stock price before the announcement and a record amount for Google,
which is more accustomed to acquiring small, promising start-ups, and is
thus making its first foray into hardware. \"We are going to
significantly increase our patent portfolio,\" rejoices Olivier
Cimelière, director of communications for Google France. With this
acquisition, the Internet giant will get its hands on more than 17,000
patents. Some 7,500 others, awaiting authentication, will fall into its
hands later. Patents are the lifeblood of the war between the players in
the sector. Owning as many as possible allows you to protect yourself
from possible attacks and protect your innovations. Above all, they are
a significant source of income since to use a patent, you have to pay a
license to its owner, generating significant royalties. \"Strong
response\" This is the shepherd\'s response to the shepherdess, they
joke at Google, referring to the battle lost at the beginning of July.
The new technology giant was then unable to complete the purchase of
some 6,000 patents from the Canadian equipment manufacturer Nortel, won
by the association of its main competitors, Apple and Microsoft in the
lead. \"It\'s a strong response, but of course, the operation wasn\'t
decided in one day,\" confirms Mr. Cimelière. This surprise acquisition
also allows Google to consolidate its position in the mobile operating
system market. Android, its in-house system, is already the leader,
since it is found on nearly half of the smartphones in circulation on
the planet, compared to around 18% for Apple, thanks only to its iPhone.
\"It\'s a market where there is a lot of competition. We are going to
continue to strengthen our position. This will allow us to give new
impetus to the Android ecosystem,\" says Mr. Cimelière, before recalling
that Motorola was the first manufacturer to have bet on this platform,
back in 2008. This allowed it to regain market share, particularly in
emerging countries. Despite this merger, other manufacturers will still
be able to offer the open-source (free of rights) Android platform on
their devices. A decision that leaves experts in the telephone market
skeptical. They find it hard to see how Google could not favor Motorola
in the long term. Especially since Google has already tried to sell its
own smartphone models, the Nexus, manufactured by subcontractors. Will
this series survive? \"The question is not current,\" says the
communications director of Google France. Acquisition is not merger, and
the two companies remain separate entities. \"Motorola\'s operational
management will not change. It will remain an autonomous company,\"
assures Mr. Cimelière, before promising that there will be no social
consequences to this merger. Taken by surprise, Apple, the world leader
in the smartphone market, and Microsoft, which wants to improve the
distribution of its mobile operating system, have remained silent,
despite Mr. Page\'s ad hominem attacks. The operation should be
completed by the end of 2011, if regulators and Motorola shareholders
approve it.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:970

Roundup and its active ingredient, glyphosate, are once again at the
center of controversy. In a report published by Earth OpenSource (EOS),
a small British non-governmental organization (NGO), a dozen researchers
criticize European authorities for their reluctance to re-evaluate the
world\'s most widely used broad-spectrum herbicide in light of new data.
The text, which has been circulating on the Internet since June, gathers
together evidence that Monsanto\'s flagship pesticide is potentially
teratogenic - that is, responsible for foetal malformations. The authors
of the report cite in particular a study published in late 2010 in
Chemical Research in Toxicology, according to which direct exposure of
amphibian embryos (Xenopus laevis) to very low doses of glyphosate-based
herbicide causes malformations. Led by the team of embryologist Andres
Carrasco, from the University of Buenos Aires, this work also identifies
the biological mechanism underlying the phenomenon: exposed to the
phytosanitary product, Xenopus laevis embryos synthesize more tretinoin,
whose teratogenic effect is well-known in vertebrates. Monsanto refutes
these conclusions, specifying that direct exposure, \"unrealistic\",
would also allow one to conclude that caffeine is teratogenic\...
\"Glyphosate has no harmful effects on the reproduction of adult animals
and does not cause malformations in the offspring of animals exposed to
glyphosate, even at very high doses\", adds Monsanto on its website.
However, the latest assessment report on glyphosate by the European
Commission, dated 2001, which is based at least in part on toxicological
studies commissioned by the agrochemist himself, specifies that at high
toxic doses, glyphosate causes in rats \"a lower number of viable
foetuses and a reduced foetal weight, delayed ossification, a higher
incidence of skeletal and/or visceral abnormalities\". According to EOS,
Andres Carrasco\'s observations coincide with suspected effects on the
human populations most exposed to Roundup. That is to say in the regions
where genetically modified crops resistant to glyphosate (known as
\"Roundup Ready\") have become established and where the herbicide is
therefore most widely spread. A review of records in the Argentine
province of Chaco showed that in the town of La Leonesa, the incidence
of neonatal malformations in the decade 2001-2010 had quadrupled
compared to the decade 1990-2000. According to Mr. Carrasco, the
commission that conducted the count recommended that the authorities
launch a proper epidemiological study. "That recommendation was not
followed," says the researcher. "That there is a problem in South
America with plant protection products is likely, but it is very
difficult to say that it is linked to glyphosate in particular," says a
toxicologist who works in the industry and criticizes the EOS report for
"amalgams" and "misleading comparisons of figures." "Furthermore," he
adds, "aerial spraying is the norm there, while it is generally banned
in Europe." » For the European Commission, the indices gathered by EOS
do not constitute sufficient grounds for changing the current schedule.
The last evaluation of Roundup dates back to 2002. The re-evaluation was
scheduled for 2012, but the delay accumulated by Brussels will push back
this new examination to 2015. This delay is not the main reason for the
NGO\'s protests. \"New rules for evaluating pesticides, potentially more
restrictive, are currently being finalized,\" says Claire Robinson, who
coordinated the drafting of the EOS report. But the re-evaluation that
will be made in 2015 will still be based on the old regulations, to give
manufacturers time to adapt.\" This is something the Commission does not
deny. The new rules - which, according to industry sources, should be
\"finalized in the fall\" - provide for a mandatory review of scientific
literature, in addition to the studies presented by manufacturers. The
work published in scholarly journals by public laboratories will
therefore have to be systematically taken into account, even if \"this
does not mean that they are systematically ignored today, far from it\",
tempers Thierry Mercier, from the French National Agency for Food,
Environmental and Occupational Health Safety (Anses). For EOS, however,
the difference is significant. \"Under the old rules, it is likely that
glyphosate will obtain a new authorisation,\" says Ms Robinson. \"We
will then probably have to wait until 2030 for this product to undergo a
serious re-evaluation, in accordance with the new regulation. While we
already know today that it poses a problem.\" Studies commissioned by
manufacturers must meet certain criteria concerning the animal species
enrolled in the tests, the nature and duration of exposure to the
products tested, etc. University laboratories - like Mr Carrasco\'s -
have greater latitude. And the differences in conclusions are sometimes
considerable. An example cited by EOS is that of bisphenol A (BPA). In a
review of the scientific literature published in 2005 in Environmental
Health Perspectives, Frederick vom Saal (University of Missouri)
estimated that 94 of the 115 academic studies published on the subject
concluded that BPA had a significant effect on organisms, even at very
low doses. At the same time, none of the nineteen studies on the same
subject commissioned by manufacturers highlighted such effects. In
France, BPA was banned in baby bottles in 2010. In the case of
glyphosate and its main degradation product, aminomethylphosphonic acid
(AMPA), several studies published in recent years highlight their
toxicity for certain aquatic organisms. \"Glyphosate or AMPA are not
very problematic molecules in themselves, at least less than others,\"
explains Laure Mamy, a researcher at the National Institute for
Agricultural Research (INRA) and a specialist in the fate of these
compounds in the environment. \"The problem is the quantity. It is the
dose that makes the poison.\" However, while glyphosate degrades
relatively quickly, \"AMPA can persist in the soil for several months.\"
In France, according to the French Institute for the Environment (IFEN),
this molecule is now the contaminant most frequently found in surface
water. Its success is therefore the main problem with Roundup.
Especially since resistance has appeared in recent years. On the
American continent in particular, where associated genetically modified
crops have allowed massive use of Roundup, weeds are starting to be less
and less sensitive - or even completely resistant - to Monsanto\'s
flagship herbicide. \"However, when these resistances begin to arise, we
are sometimes tempted to increase the quantities spread,\" says Laure
Mamy.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:971

Attention bounty hunters! At the annual Black Hat computer security
conference, which brought together experts from American government
agencies and industries as well as the world\'s most advanced hackers
from Saturday, July 30 to Thursday, August 4 in Las Vegas (Nevada),
Microsoft announced the launch of the Microsoft Blue Hat Prize Contest.
This new prize will offer \$200,000 (140,000 euros) to the person who
develops anti-piracy software capable of resisting computer attacks.
With an estimated global market share of 87.66%, the American computer
giant - and its Windows system - reigns supreme on the computer world.
It is therefore the most exposed to attacks by hackers, who have made it
their main target. The competition is open to researchers, computer
security professionals and even young geeks, provided they are at least
14 years old. Their proposals must be sent to Microsoft by April 2012.
\"This prize is designed to imagine new ideas for defensive approaches
to computer security,\" Microsoft explains on its Web site. \"As part of
our commitment to a safer computing experience, we hope to inspire
security researchers to develop innovative solutions to address serious
security threats.\" After receiving and reviewing the applications,
which must provide a prototype running on Windows and developed using
the Windows SDK, a panel of Microsoft experts will award the prizes at
the Black Hat 2012 conference. In addition to the first prize, the
Ridmond firm will award a second prize of \$50,000 and will offer a
subscription to Microsoft services worth \$10,000 to the third-place
winner. \"The value of this prize goes far beyond money,\" said Katie
Moussouris, the group\'s chief security strategist, in an interview with
AFP. We want to make it more difficult and more expensive for criminals
to exploit vulnerabilities by encouraging researchers to focus their
expertise on defensive security technologies.\" Ms. Moussouris
emphasizes that the winners of the competition will retain the
intellectual property of their invention, but that they will have to
license it to Microsoft without receiving royalties. The group also
gives itself the right to use it in its products, conferences or
communications. Detecting the flaw This is not the first time that new
technology companies have offered money in exchange for detecting flaws
in one of their software programs. Since the beginning of August, the
social network Facebook, which now claims 750 million subscribers, has
been offering \$500 to Internet users who are able to detect any flaw in
its security. The sum can be increased significantly if this weak point
is deemed \"critical\". Internet browser publishers also do not hesitate
to introduce such \"incentive\" measures. Mozilla now offers up to
\$3,000 for discovering security flaws in its Firefox search engine. For
its part, since 2010, Google has awarded a bounty of at least \$500 for
detecting bugs in \"Chromium,\" the group\'s open-source web browser
project.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:972

The time has come to return this space to its usual occupant. Before
taking my leave, I sorted out some papers, put away my bookmarks, put my
personal memories in order, which had been in great demand for a month.
And found a lost note. I had scribbled down two or three ideas in
advance with which I intended to cobble together chronicles. And then,
you know what it\'s like. The alternating current of inspiration and the
hypnosis of the nights led me down other paths. I have only a few lines
left. They will be for these lost subjects, these abandoned
destinations. And first and foremost, for the mission of Creative
Commons (http://fr.creativecommons.org/), a non-profit organization run
exclusively by volunteers. Creative Commons offers copyright contracts -
inspired by Opensource and free software - that allow the sharing of
knowledge, works, data, universal access to culture, education and
research. To find out more, the beautiful album The Power of Open ,
published for the organization\'s 10th anniversary, is available for
download at http://thepowerofopen.org. It is royalty-free, of course. In
another genre, I had also noted to mention the activities of the French
Association for Internet Naming in Cooperation (www.afnic.fr), which
manages domain names in \".fr\" (France) and \".re\" (Reunion Island). A
work in the shadows, often austere, but essential to the proper
functioning of the network. In April, the milestone of 2 million domain
names in \".fr\" was reached. Finally, as a credits, know that the
original soundtrack of these chronicles could have been downloaded here,
in this rich bank of sounds and sound effects:
http://fr.kay-soundcollection.com. Or in this one,
http://www.sound-fishing.net/ where I let you find for yourself the
recording of the final whistle.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:973

\"We commissioned two studies that recommend acquiring the Microsoft
suite because of the higher integration costs if we were to consider
free software,\" Marianne Rouette, spokesperson for the STM, told Le
Devoir yesterday. The analyses in question were led by CGI, in
collaboration with the transit authority, for one, and by the Centre de
recherche informatique de Montréal (CRIM), for the other. \"For the
moment, the new call for tenders has not been launched, but it could
target only this \[proprietary software\],\" she added. Pressure Last
September, the STM suspended its call for tenders for the acquisition of
2,577 licenses for the Microsoft Office 2010 office suite following
pressure from the Association pour l\'appropriation collective de
l\'informatique libre (FACIL). In essence, the lobby group deplored the
bias of the call for tenders favouring a specific product and especially
the absence of real competition with so-called open IT solutions.
Microsoft products are associated with so-called proprietary IT formats
that induce a dependence on the American multinational. In June 2010,
the Quebec courts established the illegality of this type of call for
tenders in a case opposing the Régie des rentes du Québec and the free
IT consulting firm Savoir-Faire Linux. The awarding of a \$723,000
contract for Microsoft products without an evaluation of an equivalent
in open format was at the heart of the dispute. While claiming to have
adopted free software in other areas of its administration, the STM is
nevertheless preparing to resume its call for tenders for the
replacement of office suites where it left off. The call, in its
Microsoft-centrist form, was cancelled last April. A new call could be
launched this fall. Note that at the beginning of June, Quebec adopted
the Act respecting the governance and management of information
resources of public bodies and government enterprises---that\'s its
title---which aims to promote the proliferation of free software in the
government apparatus. Broadly speaking, the law calls on \"public
bodies\" to \"consider free software in the same way as other
software,\" we can read. And this, in order to ensure \"the
sustainability of government digital heritage.\" To date, several
governments, including that of Barack Obama in the United States, have
made this type of decision in order to make more room for open
computing, as opposed to closed proprietary software. The reduction in
acquisition costs, greater IT flexibility and better security of
government data are also put forward to explain this call for IT
transformation and the broader adoption of free software.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:974

It looks like an ordinary suitcase. Inside, however, there is a laptop
loaded with new technologies that can be transformed into a real Wi-Fi
transmitter, in order to connect to any satellite Internet network.
There are dozens of young developers working on this project in
Washington, but the most astonishing thing is that they are doing it
thanks to funding from the American State Department. The latter
intends, in the very near future, to make said suitcase available to all
political opponents on the planet who see their access to the Web
blocked by the power in place. This could be called the secret war of
the Internet. Or how America has decided to finance many projects aimed
at allowing anyone who wants to be able to circumvent censorship in
authoritarian regimes. Last week, the New York Times revealed that the
State Department plans to spend no less than \$70 million (49 million
euros) on this effort in 2011. \"We are seeing more and more people
around the world using the Internet, mobile phones and other
technologies to make their voices heard, as they protest injustice and
try to achieve their aspirations,\" commented the head of diplomacy,
Hillary Clinton, in an email sent to the New York daily. \"This is a
historic opportunity to have an impact on all of these changes.\"
Crucial. This new American battle against censorship has largely
intensified in the wake of the revolutions shaking the Middle East,
during which the Internet and social networks have played a crucial
role. Hillary Clinton had been one of the first to speak out against the
network cuts carried out in Egypt by Hosni Mubarak. \"It\'s a response
to criticism that America hasn\'t been quick enough to support the
uprisings that we\'ve seen,\" said Bruce Hoffman, director of the Center
for Peace and Security Studies at Georgetown University and a former CIA
official. \"In some ways, it\'s also an extension of the kind of
technology that was used during the Cold War when the Voice of America
\[international radio, editor\'s note\] was used to get \'the message of
freedom\' across Eastern Europe.\" This time, the State Department has
gone a step further and, somewhat unusually, has enlisted the services
of Internet players who have long been advocates of open source and free
software. The famous suitcase, for example, which is funded by a \$2
million grant, is being developed under the direction of the New America
Foundation, a nonpartisan organization whose mission is to \"bring new
ideas into the public debate.\" messages. It uses a technology known as
\"mesh networking\" that turns computers or cell phones into
transmitters. You just have to configure the device correctly to create
an alternative Internet and connect, even if a government has cut off
its citizens\' access to the Web. Josh King, one of the engineers
working on the project, says: \"It may come as a surprise, but we
realized that the State Department\'s goals and ours were the same: to
facilitate communication between activists abroad and guarantee them
freedom of speech. And to see dictatorships suddenly collapse all over
the world, with Twitter or Facebook actively participating, reinforced
our motivation.\" In fact, Washington is multiplying initiatives. In a
dozen countries, the State Department has asked its diplomats to contact
opponents and dissidents, to assess how best to use these new
technologies. In Afghanistan, for example, the United States has already
developed a telecommunications network independent of the national
network, by installing telephone towers on military bases. This makes it
possible to communicate by mobile phone without fear of messages being
intercepted. For the moment, the State Department has taken care to
specify that these projects are intended to \"promote democracy where it
is being mistreated\", and not to facilitate the overthrow of
authoritarian or autocratic regimes. The suitcase, however, could be
operational as early as summer 2012 and \"tested\" in several countries.
\"It\'s a slippery slope,\" continues Bruce Hoffman, nevertheless,
because even if we don\'t want to say that we are directly participating
in the fall of a government, we are giving both the tools and the means
to a popular uprising to achieve its ends.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:975

According to the Business Software Alliance\'s (BSA) 2010 Global
Software Piracy Study, the value of PC software theft was nearly \$1.1
billion in Canada in 2010, and more than \$59 billion worldwide.
Twenty-eight percent of the software deployed on PCs that year was
pirated. The vast majority of computer users value the legal use of
software, but many clearly do not distinguish between legal and pirated
software. The BSA, which tracks the global piracy situation, notes that
the piracy rate in Canada is at an all-time low of 28 percent, a 6
percent drop since 2006. Michael Murphy, chair of the BSA Canada
committee, said in a statement that there is still work to be done with
businesses and consumers. \"The more we can reduce software piracy,\" he
said, \"the better off the Canadian economy will be.\" This is the
eighth study of global computer piracy conducted by the BSA, using a
methodology that includes capturing 182 discrete data points from 116
countries or regions around the world
(http://portal.bsa.org/globalpiracy2010/index.html). The study also
includes a user survey. Canadians rate licensed software as better than
pirated products in terms of technical support (92%), security (83%) and
reliability (81%). And 68% of respondents say inventors should be
rewarded for their creations to encourage more technological advances.
Globally, the survey found that support for intellectual property rights
is strongest in markets with high piracy rates. Half of the geographic
markets surveyed in 2010 had piracy rates of 62% or higher, with the
global average piracy rate at 42%. Piracy rates in emerging countries
are 2.5 times higher than those in developed countries, and the
commercial value of pirated software (\$31.9 billion) represents more
than half of the total global value. The 2010 BSA Global Software Piracy
Study covers piracy of all PC software, including desktops, laptops and
small appliances. It covers operating systems, core software such as
databases and security suites, and application software. Legitimate
freeware and open source software are also included in the study.
ytherrien@lesoleil.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:976

Quebec City web company Libéo has won two prestigious OCTAS awards for
the creation of TouchBox, a complete online movie ticketing system
developed for the IMAX theatre at Galeries de la Capitale. At the annual
gala held recently in Montreal, Libéo took home the honours in the
Consumer Electronics - B2C and Business Solution - Free Software
categories. Libéo\'s creation of TouchBox now allows IMAX customers to
book online and on their smartphones, in real time, as if they were at
the box office, using a quick and easy transaction. Two interactive
terminals are available to the public in the IMAX lobby, allowing them
to scan a \"QR Code\" and validate electronic tickets directly from a
smartphone or from the printed virtual ticket.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:977

The bill on the management of government IT, led by Treasury Board
President Michelle Courchesne, was amended to require public bodies to
consider open source software in the same way as other information
technology solutions. Earlier this year, the Treasury Board President
unveiled a framework policy on the governance and management of
information resources, which advocates the use of open source software.
However, Bill 133, tabled in the wake of this policy, did not contain
any specific reference to this type of software. During the detailed
study of the bill in parliamentary committee, which has just ended,
opposition representatives Marie Malavoy and Sylvain Simard convinced
their colleagues to amend the law, which now provides for \"taking the
necessary measures to ensure that public bodies consider open source
software in the same way as other software.\" Cyrille Béraud, one of the
leaders of the Association professionnelle des entreprises en
logiciellibres (APELL) is pleased with this addition, but points out
that a court judgment, rendered in 2010 in the case of his company,
Savoir-Faire Linux, already recognized the equivalence of free software.
APELL has also just given its agreement to create the Table de
concertation sur le logiciellibre, which will include representatives of
several public organizations, including the health, education, Treasury
Board and Emploi-Québec networks, as well as five representatives from
APELL. The sustainability of digital heritage Finally, Bill 133 has also
been amended to include a new concept in its objectives: \"ensuring the
sustainability of digital heritage\". The idea was defended by Daniel
Pascot, director of the organizational information systems department at
Université Laval and president of FACIL, an association that promotes
free computing in Quebec. Almost all information will sooner or later be
digitized, he reminds us. \"That means that software is needed to create
digital information, and to access it. Since we\'re talking about
heritage, we have to make sure that this software doesn\'t hinder
access. And the best way is to use free software, which allows access to
its source code.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:978

Caméléon, here is the program that has been the focus of all the
attention in the small world of information technology in recent months.
At least, in the French-speaking market. \"We said to ourselves that
there was a business opportunity on the market to launch a product
entirely in French, if we consider that the French-speaking world is
made up of several countries and a very large area in the world,\"
continues Mr. Perreault. We don\'t necessarily tell the classic
story\... We didn\'t get into this because French is in danger, adds
Jean-François Rioux, president of Alogient. French is simply our
competitive axis in the content management system market and that\'s a
message that got across well to the two juries of these competitions.\"
A content management system, or CMS, is a program designed for designing
and updating websites or multimedia applications. Lozeau, Desjardins,
CN, TD Insurance and more than fifty other companies or associations use
Caméléon today. For its reliability, for its simplicity, for its use of
the French language, no doubt a little too. But surely also for its free
nature. \"When we look at the trends,\" says Jean-François Rioux, \"we
see that more and more companies want to move towards open-source
software. We hope that, among people who are attracted to this type of
software and who are in the French-speaking world, the Octas prize will
bring us a gain in notoriety and popularity, that they will implement
our software but also that they will continue to develop it.\" Open
source Because that\'s the whole point of a free-source program.
Alogient produced Caméléon and put it on the market: developers who wish
to do so are then free to program modules that will complete the
product, making it ever more efficient. \"The Alogient team, which is
walking around the corridors with its head held high today, is working
hard on the evolution of the product, but other people can work on this
evolution, depending on their needs,\" explains Patrick L. Perreault.
And the business model in all this? \"Basically, people choose your
product because it\'s free, there are no licensing fees, so they save a
lot of money,\" says Jean-François Rioux. For our part, we make our
income by developing specific support plans for people who use our
product. We ourselves create sites with Caméléon for certain clients.
Not to mention the customized training programs that we can deliver to
developers, service providers or even companies, particularly the public
service, which often has very specific needs.\" Alogient also wants to
take advantage of the visibility offered by these two awards to reach
new clients, and the public service is one of its targets. Individuals
too, if they know a little bit about web programming. \"The problem with
consumer software,\" says Patrick Perreault, \"is that they always offer
the same designs\... Caméléon allows you to go further in customizing
your site\'s interface.\" The Montreal company celebrated its tenth
anniversary last year and now has about fifty employees. Its specialty:
e-commerce, Intranet and turnkey solutions, from web strategy to
hosting. Caméléon is in its fifth version and its development cost about
half a million dollars. \"The awards represent a lot on a commercial
level,\" concludes Mr. Rioux, \"but it is above all a great source of
motivation for all our employees.\" Employees who have reason to be
proud, because one of their clients also won an Octas award on Saturday
night: Computers for Quebec Schools (Opeq), which distinguished itself
in the category of information technology serving society. \*\*\*
Contributor to Le Devoir

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:979

\- Excellence DH International Axon Integration & Development
MoneyCell - an innovative mobile payment method - Personality of the
Year Robert Walsh, President of Forensic Technology - Electronic
Business SYS-TECH Technologies Imax des Galeries de la Capitale TouchBox
cinema ticketing system - Online learning (500 employees or less) FORAC
research consortium of Laval University Le jeu du bois - Online learning
(more than 500 employees) Air Canada Ellicom Promoting the brand
promise - Web environment Ministry of Tourism Bell Canada Contributory
site Destination Québec - IT project management Desjardins Group
Technological migration of the Property and Casualty Insurance sector -
Infrastructure Desjardins Group Technological migration of the Property
and Casualty Insurance sector - Innovation (100 employees or less) DH
International Axon Integration & Development MoneyCell - an innovative
mobile payment method - Innovation (more than 100 employees) Vidéotron
illico Web - Games and animation Beenox Spider-Man: Shattered
Dimensions - French in technology Alogient information Caméléon 5
content management system - IT at the service of society Computers for
Quebec schools (OPEQ) Not ordinary computers! - IT in the cultural,
educational or media sectors (100 employees or less) Society for Arts
and Technology Breaking the ice - telepresence and virtual reality - IT
in the cultural, educational or media sectors (More than 100 employees)
Musée de la civilisation Idéeclic Place Royale d\'aujourd\'hui à hier -
Student succession Arnaud Boré, Gabriel Girard, Olivier Vaillancourt
Université de Sherbrooke NeuroPlanning Navigator: software for
neurosurgical planning - Business success SherWeb - Business solution -
In-house development Vidéotron illico Web - Business solution - Open
source software SYS-TECH Technologies Imax des Galeries de la Capitale
TouchBox cinema ticketing system - Business solution - Software packages
Institut national d\'optique (INO) COVEO Solutions COVEO, cornerstone of
access to information for INO researchers - Process transformation
Commission de protection du territoire agricole du Québec Sphinx
system - processing of intervention files - Special youth award
Gabrielle Julien and Valerie Reid Youth City High School
(Vaudreuil-Dorion) The Scout 451

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:980

As you read these lines, Sylvain Carle is in California, more precisely
in Silicon Valley, the birthplace of the now famous Facebook, Google and
Twitter, looking for investors for his new baby. Sylvain Carle is one of
the 50 entrepreneurs invited as part of the 48hrs activity, a two-day
event organized by a group of Canadians who work in the Valley and who
want to encourage Canadian entrepreneurship and creativity. Thanks to
the C-100 initiative (that\'s the name these exiles have given
themselves), Carle and his associates could perhaps land the investment
that will get their project off the ground, Needium, a search engine
that suggests good addresses based on questions asked on social media.
In the Montreal web world, there are few people who don\'t know Sylvain
Carle. He\'s been working his butt off for about fifteen years and would
undoubtedly deserve the Palme d\'Or for his efforts to put people in
touch. At 39, this worthy representative of the Atari generation is
among the designers of the first Quebec websites and remembers the birth
of Wired, that\'s saying something. \"I\'m a self-taught geek,\" he
says. \"I was interested in the web and communications even before
universities offered such training. Very early on, I worked to integrate
the two. In a new job, when I was asked where I wanted my office, I
would answer: just give me a chair with wheels and a laptop. I want to
walk between the different departments and connect everyone.\" Like many
forty-somethings who work in the web and technology world in Montreal
today, Sylvain Carle is a spinoff of Public Technologies Multimédia
(PTM), the company that had enjoyed great success in the 90s with its
virtual mannequin. Silicon Valley In 1999, when he had three young
children, he decided to take the leap and leave Montreal to settle in
California. \"I told myself that if I wanted to win the Stanley Cup, I
had to go where the best were, in Silicon Valley.\" He stayed there for
less than a year. Seeing that all the projects were slowing down, a sign
that the tech bubble was going to burst, he returned to Montreal with a
good list of contacts, many projects and the blog he had started to
write to tell his experience, A Frog in the Valley. The name stuck. The
blog too. It was during a participation in the Web 2.0 Expo, in San
Francisco, that he attended for the first time a \"BarCamp\", a concept
created by Tim O\'Reilly, a true internet guru, the previous year. These
hallway discussions that are also called unconferences or
anticonferences, in which there are no speakers, only participants,
seduced this champion of networking. Back in Montreal, Sylvain Carle
therefore organized his first BarCamp. It was 2006, the French-speaking
community was not really organized and it was mainly English-speaking
geeks who participated. Since then, the concept has spawned offspring
and several camps have been held. Last weekend, for example, the second
MediaCamp attracted a hundred people within the walls of UQAM\'s Coeur
des sciences. \"I knew that this unconference concept would work,\"
observes Sylvain Carle. \"In Quebec, we like to discuss. Today, we can
attend dozens of events of this type in Montreal, the Pecha Kucha in
design, the Ted conferences, etc. It\'s a movement that is gaining
momentum.\" Montreal excitement In fact, Sylvain Carle senses a real
excitement on the Montreal techno scene. \"I hear more and more people
outside the country talking about Montreal,\" he says. \"There is more
cohesion, more communication within the community. The problem, as with
many things, is money. The first Quebec tech investors, Daniel Langlois,
Serge Godin and Alexandre Taillefer, did not reinvest in Montreal
start-ups like they did in California, for example. Money is harder to
find to start a business, although some investment funds have been set
up in recent years. All it would take is a really big success for it to
really take off.\" In the meantime, Sylvain Carle is not giving up and
is participating in all the projects that can help put Montreal on the
map. Among other things, he sits on the board of directors of Osmo, a
foundation that wants to transform the magnificent Notman house on
Sherbrooke Street to make it a must-see address in the world of the web.
Financing is being organized and the house, which currently rents its
premises to web workers in addition to hosting several geek community
events, would like to open a café on Clark Street within the next year
or two. Another exciting project: the Montreal Startup Festival, which
will take place next July, in the middle of the Just for Laughs
Festival, to attract web entrepreneurs from outside Montreal during the
summer. \"I dream of Montreal becoming a reference in techno as it is
for alternative music,\" says Sylvain Carle. \"We just need our
equivalent of Arcade Fire\...\" Sylvain Carle\'s blog:
afroginthevalley.com For more information: On the Osmo Foundation:
osmo.org On the C-100: thec100.org On the Startup Festival this summer:
startupfestival.comp

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:981

Highrise (37signals) 37signals is known for BaseCamp, a collaboration
tool that is popular with many North American SMBs. Highrise takes that
same simplicity and applies it to the customer relationship management
industry. Whose turn is it to contact a client, where are the documents
associated with a specific project, who is the lawyer handling the
company\'s files? These are the kinds of questions that Highrise solves.
Maximizer RM Live One of the oldest CRM software, Maximizer has recently
moved to the cloud, offering a slightly slower version of its software
to companies that want the same tools, without having to invest in
infrastructure. It only takes a single monthly payment. Microsoft
Dynamics CRM Microsoft recently announced that Dynamics CRM, a customer
relationship management tool that integrates particularly well with
Office business software, will be included in the online version of the
popular office suite, Office 365. This is likely to attract a good
number of companies used to managing everything on Outlook or Excel.
Salesforce Salesforce is undoubtedly a heavyweight in online customer
relationship management. It is expensive, but it is very popular with
large companies. The recent acquisition of Toronto-based Radian6 now
allows it to closely monitor what is happening on social networks. Sugar
CRM Sugar CRM is based on open source software that can be downloaded
and installed in the company, or that can be used as a web application.
It is also offered in two versions, a basic version intended for small
and medium-sized companies, and the other, more expensive, designed
specifically for large companies. Zoho CRM The Zoho cloud suite has
slowed down the pace of its new software in recent months, but that
doesn\'t stop it from offering its own CRM solution, derived from the
free software Sugar, which integrates particularly well with
applications from the Google Apps suite, from the giant of the same
name.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:982

The Rennes Opera is one of the most innovative cultural structures in
terms of new technologies. After broadcasting a retransmission of
Mozart\'s Don Giovanni in high definition and 3D in 2009 - techniques
that were still experimental at the time - this institution launched
into virtual worlds. Since November 2010, performances of the opera
season have been captured and offered live on Second Life and its
equivalent in free software Opensim. \"I wanted to take the opposite
approach to shows broadcast in streaming on the Internet, which offer a
mode of consumption that is too individual. In virtual worlds, we can
recreate a community around the show, with avatars exchanging with each
other as the real audience does,\" observes Alain Surrans, director of
the Rennes Opera. This project, called OpéraBis, was carried out with
the Bibliothèque francophone du Métavers (an association working for the
development of the French-speaking world in virtual worlds) and received
support of 14,000 euros from the Ministry of Culture. This assistance
has notably made it possible to carefully reconstruct the architecture
of the Rennes Opera, from the exterior façade to the main hall,
including the foyer, where avatars can enjoy a glass of champagne during
intermission. The shows, which are free, have all been sold out so far.
\"In order not to slow down the server, only a hundred spectators can
register at a time,\" explains Hugues Aubin, information technology
officer for the city of Rennes. \"We have already welcomed Internet
users from very diverse backgrounds, from Senegal to Argentina,
including Eastern Europe, not to mention children in sterile conditions
at the Trousseau hospital in Paris. » Next performance: The Abduction
from the Seraglio, by Mozart, on June 3.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:983

\"SOFTWARE COUNTERFEITING is prosecuted civilly and criminally,\"
emphasizes Éric Beaurepaire, member of the BSA. The Intellectual
Property Code provides for up to three years of imprisonment and a fine
of 300,000 euros. This is generally calculated based on the number of
fraudulent copies, the cost of the software and the duration of use.
\"However, there are alternatives to copying,\" reminds Éric
Beaurepaire, \"in particular with free solutions or software.\" These
are also increasingly numerous. The development of on-demand computing
also encourages the payment of software per use or per duration of use,
which limits the financial impact, especially when it comes to very
expensive technical solutions. EB

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:984

\"There is no such thing as isolated creation.\" Gilberto Gil, Minister
of Culture of Brazil from 2003 to 2008 Modern Western thought is based
on the belief that economic prosperity depends on productivity and
competition. The globalized world, based on continuous growth and
increased consumption, is nevertheless reaching its limits. It is a way
of life that jeopardizes its own sustainability through excessive use of
natural resources. For some, this logic is inevitably at stake. However,
alternative currents are making themselves heard. Many citizens are
expressing their fears and proposing alternatives to the dominant
thinking. In our research on citizen creativity, two movements capture
our attention for their potential to produce wealth and knowledge based
on humanist thinking, where collaboration and sharing are the key words.
The first movement is that of collaborative platforms for open
innovation. We list concrete applications in several areas: crisis
management (Ushahidi), science (Personalgenomes), health
(Patientslikeme), volunteering (Sparked), microfinance (Kiva, Zopa). The
platform www.patientslikeme.com is an example of \"mass collaboration\"
proposing a new way of thinking about medicine. Created in 2004 by three
MIT engineers, it has become a very active web community. More than
80,000 members (patients, doctors, researchers, etc.) share their
experiences and knowledge, particularly around chronic diseases. All
have access to a wealth of aggregated data that allows them to know and
compare treatments, to be more informed, active and responsible in the
management of their health. The second movement is based on new business
models based on the concept of Creative Commons
(www.creativecommons.org). These are intellectual property rights
licenses inspired by the principle of free software. Instead of
protecting copyright, it is freed by allowing users of the work to copy
or modify it to create new ones. It is therefore no longer a question of
piracy, but rather of sharing knowledge and creation. The areas where
Creative Commons has been adopted as a guiding principle abound:
education and knowledge (www.wikipedia.org), cinema (www.kassandre.org),
video (www.flickr.com), music (www.jamendo.com). This allows the
emergence of independent creations, based on decentralized
collaboration. New models Do you think that India (Bollywood) is the
world\'s leading film producer, after overtaking the United States? You
are wrong, because it is Nigeria (Nollywood). The Nigerian film industry
now produces more than 2,000 films per year. Every day, two to three new
films are launched in an industry estimated at 250 million per year. The
Nigerian model, bottom-up and decentralized, is a huge network of small
theaters, producers, directors and local actors who come from all walks
of life and offer films from a local perspective. The film industry is
now the second largest employer in Nigeria and exports these films
throughout Africa. In music, we see the emergence of independent
peripheral players: hip-hop (Baltimore, Texas), grind dubstep (England),
coupé décalé (Côte d\'Ivoire, France), kuduro (Angola), kwaito (South
Africa), funk and techno-brega (Brazil). In Quebec, the group Misteur
Valaire offers its albums under a Creative Commons license, based on a
voluntary contribution from the user. In Belém, a city of 1.5 million
people located at the entrance to the Amazon rainforest in northern
Brazil, the \"techno-brega\" phenomenon is booming. It is estimated that
over 4,300 DJ and band shows take place per month. About 7,000 jobs are
created directly by this industry, including about 1,600 for artists.
This is a market of 3 million per month with over 400 new CDs and 100
new DVDs per year. The main characteristic of this open model is that
everything happens independently of the dominant publishing houses. At
the heart of Nigerian cinema and Brazilian techno-brega, we find an
\"open\" business model where remixes and mashups are combined with
original creations and where production costs are very low (in the case
of Nigerian cinema, on average \$20,000 per film, minimal compared to
the \$60 million of a typical American production). Are these models to
copy? Perhaps not. However, it does make you think about the power of
open, decentralized and sharing-based platforms. Without major producers
and thanks to few intermediaries, small productions with modest budgets
promote the local co-creation of content where a greater number of
artists and citizens find their place. Marlei Pozzebon is a professor in
the international business education department at HEC Montréal.
marlei.pozzebon@hec.ca Thierry Gateau is a musician and a master\'s
student in management at HEC Montréal. thierry.beaupre-gateau@hec.ca

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:985

Sherbrooke - There are good employers. There are even some that are
remarkable because they have been able to optimize all the factors that
allow them to thwart the spectre of labour shortages, hire the best
candidates and retain the best employees. Remarkable employer, explained
Pierre Bernier, is a concrete improvement process that is certified by
the Bureau de normalisation du Québec (BNQ). An employer who obtains
certification, at the end of a process that can take only three or four
months, can display it loud and clear. They can boast of having a
competitive advantage in HRM (no longer human resources management but
human scarcity management). Pierre Bernier was speaking yesterday to the
hundred or so participants at the luncheon of the Groupe d\'action pour
l\'avance technologique de l\'Estrie (GATE). He is the president of
Groupe Ambition, specialists in demography and organizational
development. \"The ISO auditors come from outside the company. With the
Remarkable Employer certification, the auditors are the company\'s
employees. It is through their responses to a questionnaire that the BNQ
can determine whether the company is eligible for certification,\" he
explained. Linux Revolution There are remarkable employers in Quebec.
Here, in the Sherbrooke region, there is Linux Revolution, a company
specializing in free software. When you work in this field, explained
its president, Benoit de Ligneris, the competitors are called Yahoo,
Google. And the work can be done from anywhere in the world. To attract
and keep employees, you have to be bold and original. He cited the
example of a 19-year-old Swiss man hired by Linux who, today, works
mainly for a competitor. The young man, however, devotes one day to
Linux and his office is still within the walls of the Sherbrooke
company. \"He\'s the kind of flexibility you need in this field. It was
important for us to keep in touch with this young man because, we don\'t
know, in two or three years, we could work together more,\" reported Mr.
de Ligneris. The company Groupe EMS, from Magog, does not have the
certification, explained its spokesperson, Jean-Pierre Lavallée.
However, it is registered in the process. Groupe EMS (for Electro Mécano
Services) specializes in custom manufacturing of industrial machinery.
\"We decided to do this in two stages. We are at the first stage. We
registered in this process in order to react to the leveling off of our
profits despite constant growth in sales. We want to give ourselves a
distinctive niche,\" declared Mr. Lavallée.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:986

DE(berlusconi)ZER is a web tool that blocks access to anything related
to the Italian Prime Minister. The first part of the project, developed
by a group of artists and programmers, simply consists of crossing out
texts and images mentioning him with a big yellow line. The next phase
is to replace the spaces thus freed up with works by Italian and
international artists. A first exhibition brought together Claudia
Rossini (who replaced the minister\'s botoxed face with a cute kitty),
Aram Bartholl and the Alterazioni Video collective. DE-ZER subverts the
media machine created by Berlusconi and gets rid of his invasive
presence, maintained by sex scandals, trials and bad jokes\... Soon,
users will be able to propose their own content. Everything is open
source and can be adapted to modify any text or image online. For
example, replace Berlusconi with\... let\'s see\... www.de-zer.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:987

\"I stole a million Facebook profiles republished on a dating site,
digital books from Amazon that I redistributed for free. I created
networks of robots to defraud Google\'s advertising service. I
manufactured and distributed thousands of credit cards, counterfeiting
virtual money.\" These are some of the crimes claimed by the Italian
hacker artist Paolo Cirio, Robin Hood of the network, regularly
threatened with prosecution. \"These are not malicious hacks, sabotage
viruses, funny hoaxes or just slogans, but proposals to provoke
political changes,\" Cirio defends himself. After an attack against
three web giants and their monopoly (Libération, February 5), he is
attacking Visa. Or rather the banks. His project, P2P Gift Credit Cards,
proposes an alternative economy, based on a peer-to-peer architecture,
for a fairer sharing of wealth. Viral. The principle is simple: enter
your email or a telephone number on the project website. In exchange,
you become the owner of a virtual credit card with a number, expiration
date and security code, all free of charge. You can also order a
laminated copy that is more real than life. To be credited with 100
pounds (111 euros), all you have to do is provide a friend\'s email:
sharing thus creates value. Each new member will earn you additional
credits, just to make it all go viral. \"Banks are allowed to create
virtual money out of nothing by granting loans that exceed the amounts
they have on deposit,\" says Cirio, referring to the recent crisis. He
believes that everyone should have the right to lend money that they do
not have: \"In \'gift finance\', it is about transferring power from the
banks to the population, the economy would be democratically stimulated
by the community instead of private financial institutions.\" Unlike
other projects, this is not about creating a fictitious currency, even
if financial exchanges are not possible. P2P Gift Credit Cards uses
standard money and relies on existing infrastructures. \"The 16 digits
of the card are obtained with the official algorithm that codes all the
cards in the world, and the first six digits are the identifier of the
bank that issued them,\" explains Cirio, who created an independent
non-profit organization, the Basic Credit Network - unauthorized - that
issues credit cards that can be read by any electronic system. \"It is
really a counterfeit of money that could possibly be spent,\" says Paolo
Cirio, specifying that it is an artistic project. Of course, he admits,
to use these cards in shops or ATMs, the project would have to be
authorized, but \"it would already be possible to trade within the
community of cardholders.\" More than a thousand have been issued, the
goal being to reach a critical mass of users that would allow this
utopia to be transformed into a real alternative system. Futur.Paolo
Cirio will present his project on June 19 (1), on the occasion of the
Mal au Pixel open source culture festival that begins on the 9th in
Paris, and is looking specifically at the future of money imagined by
artists (Dyndy de Jaromil, Afro, the first pan-African currency by
Baruch Gottlieb and Mansour Ciss Kanakassy, or the Bijlmer Euro, local
currency by Christian Nold). http://p2pgiftcredit.com (1)
http://plateforme.tk

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:988

Whenever the Internet is mentioned, the majority of French
parliamentarians display a lack of knowledge that would make Jacques
Chirac and his field mouse look like Mark Zuckerberg. To prevent MPs
from voting for laws that are at best archaic and at worst dangerous,
the National Digital Council (CNN) was created with the mission of
\"giving opinions and formulating recommendations in favor of the
development of the Internet in France,\" Nicolas Sarkozy said yesterday.
This Council had been planned since 2008 as part of the France Numérique
2012 plan, led by Eric Besson. All that remained was to find the right
casting. In a report submitted in February, Pierre Kosciusko-Morizet,
head of Price Minister, recommended that the members of the CNN be
elected by professionals in the sector. It was a waste of time: the 18
wise men were all appointed by the Elysée, which kindly allowed the
Council to elect its president. It will be Gilles Babinet, founder of
e-commerce companies. A choice that should delight creators and rights
holders, since he declared to the Owni website: \"I think that the
traditional music industry is blind, they don\'t see the new models at
all.\" Nicolas Voisin, founder of the said Owni, is also part of the
CNN. A well-known opponent of Hadopi, he nevertheless accepted the
challenge, believing that the CNN \"could indeed serve as a forum for
consultation and guidance of public policies applied to digital
technology.\" He will head the Liberté commission, while François
Momboisse (head of new technologies at Fnac.com) will oversee the
Croissance group. Giuseppe Di Martino, secretary general of Dailymotion,
inherits the Accès workshop. Around them, representatives of operators
(Orange, Bouygues, SFR, Free) and large groups. No elected
representatives of the Republic as Kosciusko-Morizet recommended, and
even fewer consumers. Called the \"Medef of the Net\" by many,
criticized by the pro-software, the CNN could, according to Sarkozy,
lead to the creation of similar councils abroad, or even to a \"CNN of
CNNs\". This will be discussed at the G8 of the Internet scheduled for
May 24 and 25 in Paris.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:989

If the vitality of a community is measured by its ability to attract
people from outside, Montreal techno can be pleased to see Mark
O\'Sullivan getting involved. At 35, this Saskatchewan native runs
Vanilla Forums, a young company that is working on software to build
discussion forums on the Internet. The business is run from a huge
basement in the Griffintown neighbourhood shared by a dozen start-ups.
In a corner, hoods over their heads and sunk into armchairs, four guys
from Vanilla Forums are typing code on computers. The company currently
has seven employees, including a sales representative in Los Angeles.
\"By December, we should be 20,\" says Mark O\'Sullivan. To justify such
a forecast, Mr. O\'Sullivan opens his computer and points to his
company\'s web page. A counter indicates that the product created by
Vanilla Forums has been downloaded more than 450,000 times since its
launch. \"I never thought it would get this big,\" says the boss. A
late-stage company What would become Vanilla Forums began about ten
years ago, when Mark O\'Sullivan was having fun programming small
software programs in his spare time to create online discussion forums.
A great believer in the philosophy of free software, Mr. O\'Sullivan
made his work available on the Internet so that it could be taken up,
improved and modified by other programmers around the world. His idea:
to provide a base that allows a discussion forum to be easily integrated
into any website. According to their needs, users can then add all sorts
of features. It\'s a bit like Mark O\'Sullivan providing vanilla ice
cream to ice cream lovers. They are then free to add syrups, fruits and
other candies of their choice. Hence the name, you guessed it, Vanilla
Forums. At the time, however, O\'Sullivan had no intention of going into
business with his software. \"I was doing it for fun,\" he says. It was
only as the downloads skyrocketed over the years that he finally
realized that his hobby might have bigger potential. \"It took me a
while to really appreciate the hype,\" he says. \"And when I finally
did, I was busy doing all sorts of programming jobs for all sorts of
companies that I had to finish.\" It wasn\'t until 2009 that he finally
started Vanilla Forums with Todd Burry, a former colleague from Toronto.
Things took off quickly. A mutual friend introduced the two new partners
to David Cohen, a man every entrepreneur dreams of having on their side.
Cohen is the founder of Techstars, a U.S.-based \"business accelerator\"
network that aims to propel young companies. Mark O\'Sullivan and Todd
Burry were accepted into the program and headed to Boulder, Colorado,
where they met tech whizzes who helped them refine their product and
business strategy. It was during a presentation to investors organized
by Techstars that Vanilla Forums unknowingly embarked on the path that
would lead it to Montreal. For the occasion, Mark O\'Sullivan took to
the stage of an amphitheater to engage in an exercise well-known to
young entrepreneurs: selling his salad in the hopes of interesting
financiers. \"There must have been 400 to 500 investors in the room,\"
recalls Mr. O\'Sullivan. At the end of the session, several investors
spoke to the young entrepreneur to learn more. Among them was John
Stokes, partner at the Quebec venture capital fund Montréal Startup.
\"He asked us what we thought about the idea of moving to Montreal.
Honestly, we had never thought about that,\" says Mark O\'Sullivan, who
at the time was thinking more about staying in Colorado or heading to
Silicon Valley. Startup Montréal invited Vanilla Forums to visit
Montreal. Then the fund led a round of financing that also included
American funds eonBusiness, Norseman Capital (Colorado) and Klein
Venture Partners (Silicon Valley). Vanilla Forums landed half a million
dollars and moved its headquarters to Montreal. Profitability For this
company that still offers its products for free on the Internet, the
thousand-dollar question remains: how to make money? Mark O\'Sullivan
and his team answered this question with a dual website. On the first,
computer whizzes can still download the most recent versions of the
company\'s products and tinker with them as they please. On the other,
the company offers turnkey solutions for building and hosting discussion
forums\... for a monthly fee. \"The advantage of having a product
offered as open source software is that it allows you to build better
paid products. There is a whole community of programmers around the
world working on it that I don\'t have to pay for!\" says Mark
O\'Sullivan. Over the years, no fewer than 1.5 million features that can
be added to Vanilla Forums have been created, some by the company\'s
employees, but most by other programmers. In the meantime, Mr.
O\'Sullivan does not regret having set up his company in Montreal\...
and even having started a small family here. \"We didn\'t know it, but
the startup community is really vibrant here. In the end, that\'s what
convinced us to come.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:990

On June 21, 1966, at around 11 p.m., Oliver Smedley, the boss of Radio
Atlanta, which broadcast pop, jazz, and rhythm and blues music from a
boat anchored off the coast of Britain, shot and killed his main rival,
Reginald Calvert. Calvert, enraged, had burst into Smedley\'s country
home in Wendens Ambo, a small town about forty miles from London. He had
reason to be angry. A few days earlier, Smedley\'s men had stormed the
old sea forts of Shivering Sands from which Calvert broadcast Radio
City, another pirate station also devoted to music, DJ ramblings, and
advertising. The incident did not go unnoticed, and is the focus of
Death of a Pirate, the book by British historian Adrian Johns. Pirate
radio had been playing on the nerves of the BBC and politicians for many
years. It had the support of a large section of the youth, who had been
given freedom by the transistor to choose how they listened to the
radio. But this kind of settling of scores reinforced the idea that it
was time to restore order on the airwaves. The government soon closed
down all pirate radio stations, and the BBC developed a dedicated music
and record channel, for which it recruited former pirate DJs. Pop was
suddenly \"nationalised\", as Johns notes wryly: \"The pirates had to be
silenced, an acceptable substitute had to be provided, and the public
had to sell this sleight of hand.\" Calvert and Smedley were, at the
time of the fatal brawl, actors in one of the most profound changes in
popular culture. Adrian Johns, a professor at the University of Chicago
and also the author of a history of intellectual piracy from Gutenberg
to Bill Gates, has taken advantage of the opening of the archives of the
trial that followed the murder to place this case in the history of the
commerce of ideas and culture. In a style often closer to a detective
story than to academic history, he delivers a fascinating reflection on
the nature of mass culture and on the phenomenon of intellectual piracy
that is so strongly attached to it. Rebel listeners Calvert and Smedley
were not very similar. They embodied two faces of piracy. The former had
arrived at it \"from below\". He was continuing an old tradition of
technical resourcefulness that went back to the first pirates of \"the
ether\", as they were called in the 1920s to designate the Hertzian
waves. These rebel listeners circumvented the BBC\'s monopoly by tapping
into foreign stations and refusing to conform to the model of serious,
collected listening that the public service promoted. A producer of
dubious bands, Calvert had seen in radio a way to extend his taste for
entertainment. \"A resourceful and imaginative entrepreneur,
opportunistic, ambitious and rather young, he made grandiloquent
speeches, but his enterprises were improvised adventures, underfunded
and as likely to flourish as to fail,\" notes Johns. Smedley, on the
other hand, came from a different background, having entered piracy
\"from the top\": \"Privately educated, urbane and well established, he
saw himself as what he had almost been: a player in the world of the
nation\'s political and cultural affairs. He now had ambitions to
contribute to a reshaping of the creative industry.\" By sounding the
death knell for the BBC monopoly, he hoped to pave the way for a
reinvigorated and uncompromising individualism.\" For this activist for
economic liberalism, pirate radio was a kind of last bastion against
communism and collectivism. Savage capitalism It is in this regard that
Adrian Johns\' investigation is most instructive. Because we discover
through him all that piracy on the airwaves owed - beyond the image of
\"counter-culture\" that it conveyed - to free trade and savage
capitalism, including tax havens. Smedley\'s doctrine was deeply rooted
in the history of the contestation of the monopoly granted to the BBC in
1927. Had not its inspirations, the ultra-liberal economists Friedrich
Hayek and Ronald Coase, castigated the typically Keynesian and
interventionist model of organisation of the BBC, in particular the lack
of confidence it showed in the freedom of choice of listeners? The
question was in any case at the heart of the political debates of the
time. Thus, the history of the piracy crisis inaugurated by the murder
of Wendens Ambo does not only shed light on a part of the history of
mentalities in the 1960s. It can also be read as the history of the
\"moral postures\" through which we envisage the production and
circulation of information or knowledge in a society irrigated by mass
media. The \"pop pirates\", each in their own way, invented a typical
mix of \"rebellion against intellectual property monopolies, a
provocative attitude towards bureaucracies deemed obsolete, and a
pseudo-libertarian obstinacy in wanting to give priority to artistic
creation over the rules of the community\". Free software and illegal
downloading, Linux and BitTorrent, were born at the mouth of the Thames.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:991

The documentary is worth a look. The food and financial crises have
shaken the planet too much in recent years for us not to be interested
in this 90-minute film, directed by Alexis Marant and broadcast on April
19 at 8:40 p.m. on Arte. But there is another reason to pay more than
close attention to the channel\'s schedule that evening: as with Notre
poison quotidien, scheduled for March 15, Planète à vendre will be
broadcast using Pop Corn technology. A computer tool that allows the
film to be linked to different resources on the Web. Depending on the
images and subjects, the screen displays information and links that
allow you to delve deeper into the issue. The tool is called OpenSource
and comes from the Mozilla Foundation, which means that anyone can
obtain the source code and modify it. Pop Corn is therefore set to
evolve thanks to contributions from the Mozilla community. One of the
special features of this software is its ability to launch queries on
the fly on Google News, but also on Wikipedia and Twitter. Explanation:
a link associated with an image is usually fixed. If you watch the
documentary twice, it will offer you the same link twice. With Pop Corn,
it\'s different. The links offered are updated as they go along. It
remains to be seen whether these windows that open during the broadcast
will not risk annoying the viewer. \"We will surely have to find writing
formats - during certain moments, for example - that adapt to the
process,\" admits Alexandre Knetig, editorial manager at Arte.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:992

Rather than surfing porn sites alone, the prOn site proposes to
transform what is too often considered a shameful and reprehensible
practice into a social experience based on sharing. PrOn is a Firefox
extension exclusively dedicated to porn, which not only allows you to
browse without leaving any traces on porn sites (since once the pink bar
is activated, no browsing history, search, download and cookies will be
saved), but above all to share your discoveries, to tag them (anal,
amateur, spanking, masturbation, mature women, hardcore, etc.), to
recommend them anonymously, and to enjoy the sites found by other
Internet users. And if your boss catches you, a simple click makes
everything disappear. The extension is open source, to allow everyone to
improve the tool and the erotic experience.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:993

It\'s all well and good, the dematerialization of content, but the
laptop screen is less fun than the HD TV. And what\'s more, after an
episode of Dr. House, it starts to burn your thighs. Instead of
connecting the laptop to the TV (it\'s a pain, those cables to plug in,
and where\'s the remote control, we\'re not going to get up either), the
solution is to adopt a \"media center\". These boxes have been around
for a while, but, whether in terms of interface or compatible formats,
few have really proven to be up to par. Except for tinkerers. XBMC, a
free software created in 2004 to run on Microsoft\'s first console, the
Xbox, was made compatible with Windows, Mac OS and Linux in 2008. With a
long experience and a responsive community, it quickly established
itself as the best media management solution. The only small problem:
you still need a computer, and even a mini-PC remains an investment and
a technological barrier. Five members of the community then decided to
launch the Boxee project, based on XBMC, but adding a whole series of
social features and interfaces with online content, whether it comes
from sharing sites like YouTube, legal streaming platforms like Hulu.com
in the United States or video on demand. Boxee was first released in the
form of software comparable to XBMC, but the idea was to go further by
offering a dedicated, stylish and rather inexpensive box (less than 250
euros). The Boxee Box was released at the end of last year. It looks
like a very sober little black cube. All you have to do is plug it into
the television, connect it to the network, and that\'s it. Once you have
indicated where all the multimedia files are stored (legally acquired of
course, but who do you think we are?), the Box takes care of classifying
everything by series, season, artist, album, film genre, etc. You can
also access everything that the Web offers in terms of videos (with a
few exceptions for copyright reasons). In addition, a small keyboard is
located on the back of the remote control. Clever, but not ergonomic
enough to hope to do much more than a search. Even 140 characters on
Twitter is an ordeal. Ultimately, the connected TV keeps its simple role
of broadcasting moving images. Boxee Box, D-Link, 229?

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:994

In September, Bluetouff and a few hacker friends \"visited\" six French
ministries, without disturbing anything. Just to show that these
fortresses are made of crepe paper. Others have stored personal
files\... on the server that houses French patents! Since humanity
became computer-based, individuals have had the power to break into the
heart of the system. Keyboard virtuosos, they can defy administrations,
large companies, infiltrate the most closely guarded computers. And they
find themselves almost on equal terms with States. This unprecedented
power is frightening. \"Anything can be hacked,\" summarizes
cybercriminologist Laurence Ifrah. \"It\'s a question of time and
means.\" Potential demiurges, hackers are scary. And yet, most of them
work in computer security! Because \"hacking\" is above all a talent.
Everyone then chooses how to exercise it. Behind the scenes of the Net,
we come across real pirates, spies, \"hacktivists\", many geeks of all
kinds that Bluetouff compares to \"Vietnamese peasants capable of
drawing an M16\". But also, and they seem to be more numerous,
enthusiasts, who compare themselves to \"top athletes\". They are
between 16 and 40 years old. The most talented form an elite that
recognizes itself. They are driven as much by the love of art as by the
taste for challenge. And often the defense of a \"free\" Internet. From
the outside, it is difficult to understand their long nights of vigil,
their hours devoted to probing computer walls, to detect a flaw, an
entry\... Most work without seeking to monetize their dexterity. But all
can be attracted one day by the lure of gain, assures Bluetouff, who
sweeps aside the traditional categories of white, gray and black hats,
supposed to distinguish sheriffs from bandits, to conclude: \"On the
Internet, everything is blue, hackers too.\" Concretely, their training
courses are chilling, like a journey to the land of virtual
disasters\... \"I took control of the heating and ventilation system of
the University of Taiwan in ten minutes,\" says Jean-Marc Bourguignon,
alias fo0, member of Telecomix, a group that duplicates sites threatened
with censorship, notably in Tunisia, but also that of WikiLeaks. This
engineer found out which company had installed this system, identified
its technique. Before entering the computer program that controls the
heating\... The temperature could have risen. But Jean-Marc Bourguignon
is one of those French hackers who circulate behind the scenes of the
Net like an explorer. He observes and sneaks in, where the meshes of the
network seem loose. For the prowess, for the expertise. \"I wrote to the
University of Taiwan to report the problem\... but they didn\'t react,\"
regrets this 37-year-old hacker, still steeped in libertarian ideology.
Hacked ticket machines Hacking is a form of mind. Where everyone looks
at an electronic sign to know how long the bus will be arriving, the
hacker sees a computer system that can probably be hijacked. A few wacky
messages were sent by Alexis. He was also interested in the information
signs in the city of Paris or those installed on the highways\... also
weakly defended. \"The goal is not to attack them, just to see how it
works,\" explains Alexis, a member of the French hacker team Nibbles,
who recently won the Insomniak competition in Switzerland. Bluetouff
took control of the machines that issue tickets at a large Parisian
train station. Navigo cards can also be modified, recharged\... while
the RFID chips installed in passports do not seem impregnable. \"All
systems that manage machines, such as the energy distribution system,
red lights or oil pipelines are proving to be very vulnerable,\" they
warn. Companies remain just as fragile. \"But it is difficult to report
flaws without getting into trouble,\" they explain. Because French
companies do not like their systems being probed. And when a hacker
reports a problem\... he risks being arrested himself for illegal
intrusion into a computer system. The fate of engineer Serge Humpich,
who managed to break the protection of the Carte Bleue in 1997, and
wanted to negotiate his know-how with the GIE des cartes bancaire (bank
cards economic interest group) remains in the annals. In February 2000,
he was found \"guilty of falsifying bank cards and fraudulently
introducing them into an automated processing system\" and sentenced to
ten months in prison, suspended. \"The Chaos Computer Club France (CCCF)
affair also left its mark and extinguished vocations. It was a fake
hacker group created in 1989 at the request of a DST officer to monitor
the French hacker community at the time,\" recalls journalist Jean-Marc
Manach. Many hackers then left the country or moved towards free
software, which is very developed in France. \"But for the past two
years, we have observed a revival of hacking,\" according to Jean-Marc
Manach. State security services are hiring more and more of these
computer scientists every day. Because attacks are constant: ministries
suffer several every day, recognizes the National Agency for Information
Systems Security. They often come from abroad. But it is difficult to
trace an intrusion. Hackers often use paths, software, viruses, created
by others. It is a world where we glean a huge amount of information
everywhere, techniques too. Virtual chat rooms in French, a sort of
ancestor of instant messaging, bring together hundreds of hackers.
Artists and mercenaries alike. They mainly talk about code\... When a
hacker has found a new flaw that concerns a widely distributed software,
he has real power. This is called a 0Day. Like a postman\'s key that
would allow you to enter through a back door that no one has yet
spotted! These 0Days are rare. Companies buy some of them for tens of
thousands of euros. They also resell them to IT security companies
specializing in \"pen testing\", intrusion testing, etc. Still in its
infancy in France, this market is exploding elsewhere. Most of the
French virtuosos have left France due to a lack of prospects to settle
in the United States or even Switzerland, like Paul Such. In a few
years, his company has grown and now has 19 employees, all hackers and
without criminal records. They work for Swiss banks, large companies,
regions, etc. Often, their mission is kept secret. Only the director is
notified. They must try to enter the computer system from the outside or
from the inside \"in a so-called Chinese intern test\", jokes Paul Such.
They are sometimes put in front of a computer, to see what they could
collect from a simple terminal. But they are also asked to enter by
their own means\... Sometimes, all it takes is \"delivering a pizza\" to
gain access to the personal data of the clients of a large French bank,
suggests Paul Such. Dropping an infected USB key is still just as
effective. It generally ends up in a computer, opening the way to spies.
You can also make phone calls pretending to be an IT specialist for one
of the software programs used by the company. \"The weak link remains
the human\", summarizes Paul Such. We often ignore it, but hacking is as
much about technique as it is about cunning. \"Social engineering\" as
the Anglo-Saxons say. We approach the target, we guess their
password\... the names of the children, the dog. We go to the same gym,
we write down the name of a friend, to perfect a credible email. Many
plunder Facebook. \"Without difficulty. It\'s a goldmine. You can find
everything you need to approach someone.\" The new hackers, far from the
image of autistic geniuses, combine the keyboard and cunning. The young
man from Auvergne who had entered President Obama\'s Twitter account had
used almost exclusively psychology, to guess a series of passwords.
Hacker Croll wanted to show that account protection is just a mirage. A
subtlety that did not move the FBI. I took control of the heating and
ventilation system of the University of Taiwan in ten minutes JEAN-MARC
BOURGUIGNON, HACKER

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:995

A toolbox and free software. This is how the Socialist Party\'s program
is presented, from which each declared or future candidate will be able,
if they wish, to pick and choose as they please and remake it in their
own way. Its strength: to outline another society by proposing, sector
by sector - on education, housing, taxation, security, ages of life,
globalization, etc. - both specific measures and an overall philosophy.
It must be recognized that the PS worked during its years of opposition,
at least the last two, and that profound revisions, even mutations of
doctrine, appear here and there on points that are far from negligible.
Who could have imagined, even if the final proposals are behind the
vigorous debate that agitates economists and intellectuals, that the PS
would advocate a moderate form of protectionism? Or that, on the school,
it would endorse the democratic failure of the institution, incapable of
reducing social inequalities, except by finally tackling them by the
root, from a very young age, and making teachers work differently? As
for the overall philosophy, it could be summed up in a few words:
respect, protect, get moving again a country and individuals paralyzed
by globalization and who are struggling to see their future. Now, and it
will be much more perilous than arriving at a summary text, it remains
to decide the question called for by the logic of institutions and of
this very special election that is a presidential election: which
candidate?

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:996

A computer company dedicated to the medical world and based in the
United States, Medrium has offices in Quebec City in the Saint-Roch
district, since the vice-president of research and development is a
native of Quebec City. Rémi Beaumont had already worked at iXmédia in
Quebec City, but by a twist of fate, he found himself in Silicon Valley
to negotiate a game project. One thing led to another, he was hired by a
company to implement everything, but the company was sold and the
management offered his services to other companies. He then moved to
Visigenic. But the adventure was only just beginning. He met Prasad
Mokkapati, who would become the founder of Medrium and with whom he
continues to work today. Prasad Mokkapati\'s sister asked him for a hand
for her medical clinic in order to resolve the manual claims system with
insurance companies. Two systems existed on the market, but one was
overpriced and the second, cheaper, was not reliable. She wanted a
reliable and affordable solution. They decided to work on a centralized
prototype with Web access, so that doctors\' offices would not have to
modify all their equipment. The average time for processing manual
billing, which takes between 70 and 90 days, was reduced to 15 days,
with a 10% rejection rate for claims, which was a giant step forward
compared to the previous situation. \"That\'s when Medrium was born, in
1999, to create an administrative management solution for doctors\'
offices to manage schedules as well as settle the billing of fees to
insurance companies.\" The Web-accessible platform was designed with
open source software, so that, Mr. Beaumont points out, bits of code can
be rewritten as needed to obtain the desired performance. And while
business is going well in the United States and there are about 15
employees in the Saint-Roch offices, Medrium does not do business in
Quebec. Worse still, since the company makes no sales in the country, it
has been scrutinized from every angle, with government authorities
fearing that it is a front for money laundering. \"Even though it was
located in the new technology development center, the company was not
eligible for subsidies, because the intellectual property of the work
was not here, even though this is where we do all the research and
development of our billing.\" Bel Avenir And with developments in the
United States for the creation of electronic medical records for
patients, Medrium has obtained government approval for its system, which
will be implemented in the coming years. With the system for medical
clinics and services for doctors under contract in hospitals, Mr.
Beaumont sees the future as bright. \"We should double our revenues
every year over the next three years,\" he adds, \"and create other jobs
here.\" So Rémi Beaumont left Quebec City for Silicon Valley in order to
better return to Quebec City and create jobs there. \"Whether it\'s
California, New York or Boston, the work is interesting, but the quality
of life in Quebec is incomparable,\" says Mr. Beaumont. \"With today\'s
technologies, from Quebec, we have access to the entire planet.\"
Nevertheless, to keep up with the latest technological developments, Mr.
Beaumont still travels a lot. ytherrien@lesoleil.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:997

The first change, and it is a major one, is that Quebec will no longer
only talk about the Health Record (DSQ). The reason is simple: a 100%
digital network is not just a database, however complete it may be,
explained Health Minister Yves Bolduc. Quebec has therefore decided to
take control of the computerized clinical records (DCI) of hospitals as
well as the electronic medical records (EMR) of clinics. This is a major
step forward, notes Lise Denis, Executive Director of the Association
québécoise d'établissements de santé et de services sociaux (AQESSS).
"This is the first time that we have recognized that these three files
are convergent and complementary and that one cannot function without
the other." According to her, the arrival of Lise Verreault at the head
of the computerization governance office is also likely to reassure the
health sector, which was starting to seriously worry. And for good
reason. The Auditor General noted a number of inconsistencies in this
project, which was launched in 2006 with a view to a full deployment in
January 2010. In his last of three devastating reports, he concluded
that the costs and the planned timelines were completely
\"unrealistic.\" This week, Minister Bolduc agreed that the 100% digital
network he dreams of will not be ready before 2016. \"Computerizing a
health network is complex. We need to return to a more realistic
timeline of five to ten years,\" he admitted. Last fall, the DSQ\'s poor
management was on everyone\'s lips in the health network, when a fourth
boss decided to leave a ship that had apparently gotten out of control.
Lise Denis summed up the general feeling in a heartfelt cry. In 2009,
\"we wondered if there was a pilot in the plane. Today, the plane no
longer even appears on the radar screens.\" The list of grievances that
were circulating at the time was long: delays, lack of vision and
cohesion, computer bugs, serious governance deficit, problem of aligning
the DSQ with the DCI and DME developed haphazardly, without
consultation. By the minister\'s own admission, the change of direction
announced this week is intended to be a response to the many criticisms
made in the past, especially those expressed by the Auditor General. The
choice to bring the DCI and DME under ministerial control, after years
of more or less successful local and regional management depending on
the region, also confirms \-- but without saying it bluntly \-- that the
parallel development of the various systems, software and other
platforms was a mistake that cost taxpayers time and money. Suppliers
and open source software Developing software is indeed expensive. So is
purchasing it. This is also what weighs the heaviest in the hefty bill
for digitizing the health network, which will reach 1.4 billion, or 563
million for the DSQ and 800 million for the DCI and the DME. It must be
said that the Minister of Health wanted to give institutions and clinics
a certain latitude in choosing platforms. He therefore authorized the
development of several different software programs at once, thus
multiplying the duplication of all kinds in order to respect the
regional specificities of each. The interested firms and organizations
nevertheless had to respect two imperatives, namely to develop an open
system, therefore adaptable, and fully compatible with the DSQ developed
in particular by Bell xwave. For clinics, the MSSS has so far selected
four suppliers, all from Quebec: Omnimed.com, Purkinje, KinLogix and
Soft Informatique. Four major computerized clinical record (CCR) systems
have been selected for hospitals: Ariane, Purkinje, Oacis and
Cristal-Net. Only the latter is free software, a choice that many have
questioned. Supporters of free software, i.e. without constraints, argue
that this software is distributed free of charge, if not at a very
reasonable price, and that it therefore does not come with costly
licenses to renew, a major advantage that Quebec should have taken
advantage of for a contract as ambitious as this one. Be careful,
retorts the Ministry of Health, free software is not freeware, since it
provides for the payment of several associated services including
creation, development, deployment or support. There are costs to be
assumed with both formulas and it has been established that, in this
case, one is not necessarily worth more than the other, confirms Karine
Rivard, press attaché to Minister Bolduc. \"Even when the software is
free, there are amounts to be paid to make adjustments; the difference
is that they are paid on a case-by-case basis whereas, for regular
software, payments are made automatically when the license is renewed.\"
It was impossible to know how much the licenses will cost once the
network is deployed. Firstly because we do not know which suppliers will
be selected by whom, but also for reasons of competition. Nevertheless,
these will certainly colour the next step, which consists of deploying
the selected digital solutions throughout Quebec by ensuring their
interoperability with the DSQ, which can be compared to the warehouse
where the data will be stored. Deployment, one step at a time "We were
in a development phase in which companies were developing systems,"
explained Minister Bolduc. "Now that the structure is robust, we can
move on to deployment, which will be done gradually, region by region."
Tangible results have indeed ended up emerging from these five years of
development in silos. Thus, radiology, laboratories and medications are
already completely computerized at the local level. Several hospitals
have also started to use one of the DCIs selected by Quebec, notably the
four major university hospitals. In Montreal, the Centre hospitalier de
l\'Université de Montréal (CHUM) and the McGill University Health Centre
(MUHC) have pooled their efforts in Oacis, an ICD developed in
partnership with Telus. In operation for a few months, it has greatly
simplified the work of clinicians, says Dr. Luc Valiquette, clinical
director of technological transition at the CHUM. Thanks to this tool,
it is now possible for a doctor to see all the patients in a department
at a glance, consult their clinical notes, check their examination
reports or even monitor and compare the evolution of their vital signs
(pulse, temperature, blood pressure). All the laboratory data concerning
them is also compiled and, since there are often several, abnormal data
is marked in red so that it can be spotted quickly. From a clinical
point of view, the gains are already remarkable, notes Dr. Valiquette,
who is also a urological surgeon. In addition to all the time saved by
rummaging through paperwork or getting results, staff can count on a
therapeutic advisor or prescriber to keep an eye on things. If one
medication interferes with another, for example, an alert message
appears. In terms of security, the software is rock-solid. Professionals
have access to it using biometric identification based on their
fingerprints. Each time they log in, the system notes it and stores the
information added or corrected. It has never been easier to trace a
patient\'s history. In short, \"the system is fully functional, even if
it still has room for improvement,\" notes Dr. Valiquette. In this
regard, the clinical director of technological transition at the CHUM
also advocates caution and warns against rushing to deploy tools too
quickly in the network. \"From a clinical perspective, I am very eager
to have access to a 100% computerized network, but at the same time, I
am aware of the difficulties that arise in ensuring data security. I
think we need to take the time to do things right.\" For now, the
CHUM\'s data is only accessible within its three constituents:
Notre-Dame, Hôtel-Dieu and Saint-Luc. The same goes for the MUHC. The
reason is simple: the law prohibits the sharing of data between
institutions. That is set to change. But to do so, the law will have to
be amended, Minister Bolduc said Tuesday. The tools themselves are
constantly evolving and will be required to change over the months, Yves
Bolduc promised. \"The beauty of the Quebec system is that it is open,
which will allow it to adapt.\" Provided that professionals follow,
notes Lise Verreault, who will lead the deployment starting April 18.
\"You know, computerization comes to computerize what someone does, but
it\'s what that someone does that is sometimes difficult to change.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:998

The West produces nearly 50 million tons of electronic waste per year
(of which only 25% is recycled in Europe), dumped in Africa, India and
China. These countries are transformed into digital trash cans, as
evidenced by these smoking mounds of dismembered and toxic computers in
Ghana, captured by Pieter Hugo\'s lens in his series Permanent Error.
The question of recycling is at the heart of Benjamin Gaulon\'s work.
Whether it\'s giving a second life to digital files that we no longer
have any use for or reorganized computer hardware. \"One person\'s trash
is another person\'s treasure,\" says the author of Digital Recycling, a
sort of online garage sale that allows you to exchange discarded files,
\"a bit like an object abandoned in a street that becomes public
property.\" A graphic designer, Benjamin Gaulon trained in electronics
and programming to be able to master his own tools. Because \"using
software is living someone else\'s dream,\" according to one of his
teachers. The hip-hop and video game fan began to dismantle and tinker
with obsolete game consoles, transforming Nintendo\'s NES into a RES
(Recycling entertainment system), a musical installation for six
players, equipped with a controller connected to software that allows
you to play one of the instruments (bass, percussion, synthesizer, etc.)
and turns solitary play into a collective experience. A RES-mini version
now exists, to be built yourself from A to Z, thanks to an online
manual, with open source software and the Arduino platform. Bric-a-brac.
\"Initially, recycling was imposed for stupidly financial reasons,\"
admits the artist who has made it his hobbyhorse. He is interested in
the planned obsolescence of consumer goods, but also in those products
(iPhone, etc.) that we throw away even though they still work, simply to
have the latest fashionable design. Rather than long speeches, he
confronts the public directly with these outdated technologies, which he
diverts into new devices, as in ReFunct Media, a long chain of hacked
and interconnected televisions, cameras, MO5 computers and other
Gameboys. Or invites them to get their hands dirty during e-waste
workshops, in which participants are invited to imagine a personalized
creative object from a bric-a-brac of dusty scanners, printers and other
electronic toys. \"People realize all that can be done with this waste.
This electronics from the 70s to 90s is relatively easy to hack. Today,
it\'s more complicated. Often, it\'s a single chip that controls the
whole thing, covered in glue to prevent manipulation.\" Like most people
of his generation (he is 31), Benjamin Gaulon navigates between online
and offline, parasitizing cyberspace with his image corruption software,
or investing the walls of the city, with his augmented Pong that allows
you to play against a building, the ball ricocheting off the roughness
of the architecture. Psychogeography. Sometimes, the installations
straddle the two, like Hard Drivin\', a revisited version of the first
racing game in a 3D setting, where Internet users can remotely control
small electric cars that run on tweets. Based in Dublin, he has made the
city his playground, organizing curious psychogeography workshops.
Equipped with a 2.4 GHz receiver, an electronic gadget purchased on a
Chinese site, participants scan the city for signals from private
wireless surveillance cameras. The images intercepted on the screen
highlight a strange paradox, that of the guard being watched, \"they
allow you to see from the street what is supposed to be protected, a
child\'s bed, a changing room, etc.\" www.recyclism.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:999

There\'s no doubt about it: spring has arrived. The sun is setting, the
sparrows are chirping and on the Internet, a baby red panda (no, it\'s
not a fox) is poking its nose out\... Indeed, today sees the release of
Firefox 4, the latest version of the most widely used web browser in
Europe. A near monopoly. Who would have imagined that the little
software from the Mozilla Corporation would end up supplanting the
Internet Explorer (IE) from the great Microsoft? When it was created in
2004, the mission seemed impossible. With IE being pre-installed on all
new computers equipped with Windows, Microsoft enjoyed a near monopoly.
But over the years, the IT giant has been caught up by its competitors.
Each of them had the opportunity to stand out with its own philosophy,
technical innovations or aesthetic developments\... Opera, the Norwegian
outsider, launched many features, subsequently taken up by competitors
and which became essential (tabs, the search box, etc.). Safari took
over mobile browsing thanks to the success of Apple\'s iThings. The
new-born Google Chrome, launched with great fanfare, stood out for its
lightness and speed. Firefox invented extensions and developed a real
browsing ethic by campaigning for free software. As for Internet
Explorer, it has lagged behind in innovation but intends to catch up
with its brand new version 9, which hopes to appeal beyond corporate
computer systems. Race. Over time, all have adapted to the content of
web pages as well as to new browsing practices, in a spirit of
competition and a race for modernity. As the preferred interface between
the Internet user and the Web, the browser is at the heart of current
issues in the Internet ecosystem. Exploring the five characteristics of
a next-generation browser. Illustration by Jessy Deshais

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1000

In everyday English, BYOB means \"Bring your own booze\". Diverted by
the Net-artist Rafael Rozendaal, the acronym can also mean \"Bring your
own beamer\". This new format of ephemeral exhibition breaks with
traditional modes. Its principle is in the title. The artists come with
their video projector under their arm, plug in in the exhibition space
and project their works there. After Berlin, Athens, New York, Mexico,
or London, Paris is hosting a new edition of BYOB, this Sunday, at the
Plateforme gallery, initiated by the artists Cécile Babiole, Marika
Dermineur and Nicolas Maigret as part of the monthly meeting dedicated
to digital creation User_Friendly. An improvised happening consisting of
one evening dressing the space with artistic projections and
performances by around twenty artists. "I work with moving images,"
explains its instigator Rafaël Rozendaal. "For this reason, I have
exhibited a lot with projectors. Projection gives freedom and
flexibility and I thought it would be interesting to see what would
happen if a lot of people got together and everyone brought their own
video projector. I was looking for a way to organize a one-night
exhibition, both imposing and easy to set up." The first edition was
held in Berlin on June 20, in a huge studio, with twenty-six artists,
most of them from the Internet. "We were surprised how easy and fun it
was," continues Rafaël Rozendaal. "There was a very special feeling of
community that night, a lot of energy and spontaneity. Immediately,
Angelo Plessas, who was there, offered to organize a BYOB in Athens and
everything got going. I wrote a manual on the dedicated site and,
following the New York edition, many people took it up and BYOB spread
everywhere.\" The reason for its success can be summed up in one word:
\"because it\'s fun above all.\" BYOB is an \"open source\" format that
anyone can take on, a bit like the Speed Show (Libération, June 26,
2010), imagined by Aram Bartholl, which consisted of renting all the
workstations in an Internet café to exhibit Net art works for a few
hours. \"Any artist can start a BYOB, and do it as they wish. I don\'t
need to be involved,\" says Rozendaal. \"The organizers can select the
participants or open the system to all the artists who come and project
what they want. What matters to me is that BYOBs are all very
different.\" It's also a way to infuse the hacker and do-it-yourself
spirit into the art world. "Artists take charge of their own equipment,
there's no control, everyone is their own decision-maker," says
Rozendaal. BYOB also allows "to show things that are not normally seen
in exhibition spaces" and to materialize the Internet in the physical
world. "BYOB is a celebration of the new world we live in and a taste of
what computing could look like in the future. The Internet is now
confined to screens, tomorrow, information will be all around us,
composing our surfaces, defining our spaces, getting tangled up with the
ether." In Paris, the space will be open to invited artists, but also to
"anyone who would like to join the event, if possible," says Nicolas
Maigret. www.byobworldwide.com BYOB Paris, Sunday March 20 from 6 to 9
p.m., at Plateforme, 73 rue des Haies 75020 and at 78. www.plateforme.tk

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1001

The Quebec Auto Show Preview Cocktail Party is being held tonight (by
invitation) at the Hôtel de Glace in Quebec City, from 6 p.m. to 10 p.m.
This benefit evening, at \$150 per ticket (at 418 624-2290), will be
followed, starting at 9:30 p.m., at the same location, by the D-Frost
Party open to all. Admission: \$10. The proceeds from this evening will
go to the Mobilis Foundation, which will donate the majority of this sum
to the Quebec City Memory Walk and the Ronald McDonald House.
www.salondelautodequebec. co Mr. Donald L. Gilbert, the new President
and CEO of Infoglobe, an ICT company in the Quebec City region,
announces to me the acquisition of all of the company\'s shares by a
group of ten (10) employees of the company. This acquisition is part of
a strategic repositioning of the company, which began in August with the
arrival of Donald Gilbert as CEO of the company. Founded in 2002,
Infoglobe specializes in business solutions based on open source
technologies. This acquisition will allow us to refocus our activities,
particularly on the development of consulting services, the
implementation of a product/service portfolio that meets customer
expectations in terms of added value for their organization, security
and functionality, while integrating into the new reality of the market,
particularly with the new Quebec policy on the governance and management
of information resources of public bodies, Donald Gilbert tells me.
www.infoglobe.ca. More than 500 participants took turns at the
Form-Action Centre in Pont-Rouge on February 5 to take part in the 3rd
Spin-Don for the benefit of the Canadian Cancer Society. The fundraising
event, which took place over two days for the first time, raised a
record \$52,000, more than double last year\'s total. In addition to
Minister Yves Bolduc, who rode a stationary bike, several celebrities
also pedaled alongside coach Caroline Jackson. Among them were former
Nordique Alain Côté, football players Bruno Prud\'homme and Marc-Antoine
Beaudoin-Cloutier, and Dominique Picard (Rouge et Or and Toronto
Argonauts). Mario Larue, kinesiologist and owner of the Centre Form
Action, thanks all the participants and volunteers who got involved and
invites them to the 4th Spin-Don in February 2012. Brigitte Duguay and
Hocine Amouchi will celebrate the first anniversary of their restaurant,
Le Guilliss Grill, located at 1039, 3e Avenue in Limoilou, on Saturday,
March 26. Fans of smoked meat and AAA Angus-certified grilled meats will
also be delighted with home-cooked food. Information: 418 977-4754. The
Choeur de Québec will present Karl Jenkins\' masterpiece Le Stabat Mater
during its annual Good Friday concert on April 22 at 8 p.m. at
Saint-Charles-Garnier Church in Sillery, under the musical direction of
Guy Bélanger. Guest artists will be CatherineÉlizabeth Loiselle,
soprano; Marie-Josée de Varennes, mezzo-soprano; Guy Lessard, tenor; and
Pierre Rancourt, baritone. Information: www.choeurdequebec.org or 418
681-8191. CITY ECHOES BIRTHDAYS Jean Cournoyer (photo), Quebec
politician, Minister of Public Service (1969-1970, 1972-1973), Labour
and Manpower (1970-1975), and Natural Resources (1975-1976). 77 years
old. Christian Bégin, actor (Vice caché) and host (Télé-Québec), 48
years old. Jean L\'Italien, role of Bernard Paré in the series Virginie
on the CBC, 53 years old. Isabelle Huppert, French actress (8 femmes)
and producer. César Award for Best Actress in 1996 (La cérémonie), 56
years old. Erik Estrada, American television (CHiPS) and film actor, 62
years old. Ghislaine Paradis, Quebec singer and actress (Quelle
famille!), daughter of actor Gérard Paradis. 63 years old. Richard
Desjardins, singer-songwriter, director and producer 63 years old.
MISSING May 16, 2001. Juliette Huot (photo), 89 years old, actress,
whose career spanned more than sixty years in theatre, radio and
television. Knight of the National Order of Quebec. 1999. Gratien
Gélinas, 89 years old, actor, playwright and director. 1992. Roger
Lemelin, 73 years old, writer. \"Les Plouffe\", published in 1948. 1979.
Jean-Guy Cardinal, 54, Minister of Education under the Union Nationale
government from 1967 to 1970. IN MEMORY March 16, 1961. Sixteen years
after Maurice Richard, Bernard Geoffrion (photo), of the Montreal
Canadiens, became the second player in the history of the National
Hockey League (NHL) to record 50 goals in a season. His victim was
Cesare Maniago, the goaltender for the Toronto Maple Leafs. The mark set
by Maurice Richard in 1944-1945, 50 goals in 50 games, nevertheless
remains intact since Geoffrion needed 64 games to record his 50 goals.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1002

If it\'s called a \"Trojan horse\", it\'s not for nothing. Like the
Greeks, in Homer\'s work, who hid in a large wooden horse and then went
to open the gates and allow the entire army to come and pillage the
city, the hacker uses a computer program that seems harmless, even
innocuous. A meeting summary, an important schedule or even the latest
very funny cat video circulating on the Internet\... Its name and
description should make you want to open it and thus make the same
mistake as the Trojans. In the case of Bercy, it was a PDF document,
attached to an email usurping the identity of a trusted person. Once the
program is executed, not much happens for the user. At best, he will
actually be able to admire a cat playing the piano. But, it is in fact
just a decoy, the real activity of the Trojan horse is invisible: it
will quietly install a remote control program for the computer,
sometimes basic and dedicated to a single task, sometimes much more
sophisticated. Zombie. The first case is very widespread, it is the
creation of what are called \"botnet networks\", or zombie, where
thousands of computers are controlled by the same program. This can be
used, for example, to send mass spam of all kinds. The BredoLab botnet,
controlled from Russia and dismantled in November, controlled more than
thirty million computers and could send up to 3.6 billion spam messages
per day. But Trojan horses can also install complex remote control
software. These then operate in a hidden manner on the infected
computer. An informed user will be able to spot its existence by
checking the list of programs currently running, but for ordinary
mortals, it is more complicated. If the program in question is
specifically developed and is not listed by antiviruses, it is almost
impossible. And the hacker, from his computer, will then be able to
access practically everything that is stored on the machine, as well as
everything that passes through it. For example, he will be able to see
in real time what is happening on the victim\'s screen, and know which
keys are used on the keyboard (useful for recovering passwords), recover
all the contents of the hard drive, or even control the mouse pointer.
The most famous takeover software that can be used by a Trojan horse is
called Back Orifice (or Back Orifice 2000, its evolution), developed by
the legendary hacker group Cult of the Dead Cow (cDc). Back Orifice is
presented by its creators as being a completely respectable remote
administration program. This type of software is very common and allows,
for example, an IT department to come to the aid of users without having
to physically walk around everywhere. But the members of cDc have
equipped their creation with rather suspicious features, such as
disappearing from the eyes of the operating system, or bypassing the
protections set up by a firewall, by using the communication channels of
a web browser. If Back Orifice is a free software that can be downloaded
very easily, it is also recognized (and banned) by the most common
antiviruses. Needle. This is not the case in the case of Trojan horses
developed specifically for particular operations, such as the one that
took place against Bercy and the Elysée. Which makes them, suddenly,
much more difficult to detect. In fact, IT teams must closely and
permanently monitor all suspicious communications on their network and
to the Internet. But what is a suspicious communication? Not easy to
determine in an automated way. It is, roughly, like trying to spot a
needle in the annual global production of hay. Hence the absolute
necessity for security services to share their information on a global
level. Once a program is spotted in one place, it must disappear from
all the networks on which it has installed itself. Just so as not to be
overtaken. Well, not too quickly.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1003

The Internet has become, in the space of a few weeks, a new battlefield.
Social networks play a strategic role in the popular uprisings of the
last few months, but it is a weapon that can be turned against the
population, according to Eben Moglen, professor of law at Columbia
University. This American lawyer has worked alongside Richard Stallman
since the early 90s as legal advisor for the FreeSoftwareFoundation. He
played a key role in developing the legal foundations of free software.
If the events of the last few months have revealed the strength of the
Internet, they have also exposed its main vulnerability: the
centralization of data. The more information becomes centralized, the
more the powers that be risk controlling it. In a recent interview with
the New York Times, he states that the time has come for free software
to get involved in politics, by creating a tool to decentralize the
Internet. He announced his project in early February in Brussels, on the
occasion of the annual conference of free software in Europe (FOSDEM
2011). On this occasion, he announced the creation of the Freedom Box
Foundation, in order to raise the necessary funds to implement his
project. In a few weeks, his new foundation has already raised more than
\$75,000, with a goal of half a million dollars. The technology he wants
to use already exists, it is mini-servers (plug-servers), barely larger
than a cell phone, similar to the small transformers that power our
electronic devices. Devices that cost less than a hundred dollars. Eben
Moglen\'s project is to make Freedom Boxes by adding software that will
allow each user to manage their own social network, to control access
and the diffusion of their own data. While large social networks are
structured around a single central core, mini-servers would make it
possible to create a multitude of mini-networks, meshed with each other,
and which would thus escape central control. \"We need to keep our data
in our homes, where it is protected by laws against physical search,\"
he says. An opinion shared by Daniel Pascot, director of the Department
of Organizational Information Systems at Université Laval. \"A server is
essentially a central point that manages access. The centralization of
servers makes us vulnerable because the moment we control the server, we
control the traffic. With mini-servers, it would be like Facebook, but I
would be the one controlling access to my data.\" It would even be
possible, in theory, to create wireless cores that could operate outside
the Internet. Control In recent months, we have seen several attempts to
control these networks. On January 27, on government orders, Telecom
Egypt and the four main Internet service providers shut down their
servers. In just five minutes, 93% of Egyptian users had lost their
service. This did not prevent the fall of Mubarak, but several countries
will certainly learn from it. Last year, even before these uprisings,
Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, India and Indonesia had already
forced RIM to allow access to data sent on BlackBerrys. In February,
after the fall of the governments in Tunisia and Egypt, we saw India and
Pakistan return to the charge and demand even more surveillance powers
over these same devices. Even in the United States, a bill has been
under consideration since June to give greater powers to the president
in the event of a \"cyber emergency.\" According to Eben Moglen, the
greatest danger of centralized networks is that states will use them to
identify the leaders and make them disappear. Moreover, during the
Egyptian uprising, protest leaders had asked citizens not to spread
information via social networks. Traditional media are not immune
either. The CBC announced this week that it was stopping broadcasting
interviews with Libyan citizens after Gaddafi supporters disappeared
people who agreed to speak. passelin@lesoleil.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1004

Trois-Rivières - \"The world has no borders!\" That\'s the only
conclusion Mathieu Lahaye could draw, a young entrepreneur from
Trois-Rivières, president of Inventis who, thanks to an invitation to
tender, has just obtained a prestigious contract from the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). His mandate is to design a
custom business intelligence solution, integrating textual and
geographic data\... more concretely, a unique working tool of
breathtaking precision, allowing humanitarian aid organizations to be
much more efficient and sometimes even anticipate the future. The young
man admits that the thing may seem complicated to the uninitiated. It is
actually quite simple if you know the Google Maps application. It\'s
what it allows you to achieve that makes your head spin. \"What we are
going to do is a bit of high-flying technology,\" admits Mathieu Lahaye
with a laugh. \"There are not many companies that can do this kind of
combination of geographic information and database information. We start
from the principle that a picture is worth a thousand words. A
geographic map is a tool that allows us to synthesize a very complex
situation and make it very clear.\" The UNHCR currently has an
impressive database that contains information on displaced populations -
age, sex, country of origin - on several continents, the infrastructure
of the camps under its responsibility or the services accessible in
urban or rural areas, as well as an elaborate map of refugee or
internally displaced person camps, explains Mr. Lahaye. The High
Commissioner hopes that these various databases will be able to \"talk
to each other\" in order to be able to know with great precision where
budgetary resources are allocated and to make more informed decisions.
Mr. Lahaye confides that the Trois-Rivières firm was invited to submit a
bid simply because it has its own website and the High Commission found
it. On the other hand, if it was chosen, it is undoubtedly because it
already has experience in what is called the field of free software.
Inventis has indeed acquired international experience in Europe and
Africa, particularly during mandates - just as complex - carried out for
UNICEF and the UN Food Security Programme, which has produced a tool
capable, among other things, of anticipating future droughts. \"This is
an element that worked in our favour,\" he says. When the mandate is
completed, the UNHCR will have an application accessible via the Web,
thanks to which its staff will have access to precise and up-to-date
cartographic information on the evolution of the situation on the
ground. It is also Inventis that will train the UNHCR staff on the use
of the application developed. Mr. Lahaye said he was proud of this new
contract awarded to a Trois-Rivières firm\... which fully intends to
remain in Trois-Rivières even if it also hires contractors from outside.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1005

The organization asks its potential collaborators to submit
\"unavailable\" documents that have not yet been in the hands of
investigative journalists. Québec-Leaks also asks that opinions or
allegations not be provided without formal supporting evidence.
QuébecLeaks is a site inspired by WikiLeaks, \"made by Quebecers for
Quebecers,\" which aims to be a more local platform where individuals
with privileged access to sensitive documents can make them public
anonymously. A simple process QuébecLeaks offers two submission
mechanisms. Thus, it is possible to submit documents via a secure HTTPS
connection or via the free software Tor. From the secure HTTPS
connection, any Internet user with the slightest bit of skill can submit
Microsoft Word and PDF files. Once you have agreed to browse a site
whose security certificate is problematic, that\'s it, as The Canadian
Press noted. In short, the submission process is disarmingly simple. The
HTTPS process is secure, since banks use the same protocol, according to
a professor in the Department of Computer Science and Software
Engineering at Université Laval. \"If QuébecLeaks\' goal is to ensure
the anonymity of its sources, that\'s fine, but if the information
affects national interests, then we\'re in a grey area. Sometimes,
government intelligence services allow themselves a certain latitude,\"
explains Béchir Ktari. Questions When the documents start to flow in,
one might wonder how the organization \-- whose number of members is
unknown \-- will manage the continuous flow of information and how it
plans to sort the data obtained. Just as one might wonder where
Québec-Leaks gets its financial and human resources. In an email sent to
The Canadian Press yesterday, the organization\'s spokesperson explained
that container and content analyses would be carried out for each
document received. Once the system and security administrators have
determined that the documents are safe and that there are no more traces
of the bidder, the information will be transmitted to \"several
collaborators from different fields\" that QuébecLeaks says it can count
on \-- lawyers, accountants, professional journalists, computer
scientists and political scientists. The latter will ensure that the
documents are admissible and will erase \"all traces of innocent
victims.\" And as for the financing aspect of the adventure, QuébecLeaks
has mentioned the possibility of setting up a structure to collect
donations from the public in order to finance, \"if necessary, the
\'full-time employees\' part of the project.\" The organization has also
claimed to have been approached by donors and investors. Noam Chomsky
But all these details will be specified on March 9, maintained the
mysterious spokesperson for QuébecLeaks, who signs all his emails with
the name of the famous linguist and activist Noam Chomsky. The
Québec-Leaks contact once again refused yesterday to grant a telephone
interview to The Canadian Press, arguing that the organization prefers
to \"maintain anonymity and therefore a certain legal security for the
members of the group.\" \"We understand very seriously the need to
conduct telephone and in-person interviews, but for the moment we must
stick to email exchanges,\" wrote \"Noam Chomsky.\" But unfortunately,
this is what was proposed to us by our lawyers and advisors.\" In short,
a veil of mystery surrounds QuébecLeaks, which has still not announced
the name of its spokesperson, the Quebec \"Julian Assange.\" His
identity was to be revealed at the official launch of the site, but it
was postponed from February 16 to March 9.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1006

Internet users will be able to submit their first sensitive documents on
the whistleblower site QuébecLeaks starting Wednesday, even if they
still don\'t know exactly who they are dealing with. The organization is
asking its potential collaborators to submit \"unavailable\" documents
that have not yet been in the hands of investigative journalists.
QuébecLeaks is also asking that you not provide opinions or allegations
without formal proof to support them. QuébecLeaks is a site inspired by
WikiLeaks, \"made by Quebecers for Quebecers\", which aims to be a more
local platform, where individuals with privileged access to sensitive
documents can make them public anonymously. QuébecLeaks offers two
submission mechanisms. Thus, it is possible to submit documents via a
secure HTTPS connection or via the free software Tor. Like banks From
the secure HTTPS connection, any Internet user with the slightest skill
can submit Microsoft Word and PDF files. The HTTPS process is secure,
since banks use the same protocol, according to a professor in the
computer science and software engineering department at Université
Laval. \"If QuébecLeaks\' goal is to ensure the anonymity of its
sources, that\'s fine, but if the information affects national
interests, then we\'re in a gray area. Sometimes, government
intelligence services allow themselves a certain latitude,\" explained
Béchir Ktari. Once the system and security administrators have
determined that the documents are secure and that there are no more
traces of the submitter, the information will be transmitted to
\"several collaborators from different fields\" that QuébecLeaks says it
can count on - lawyers, accountants, professional journalists, computer
scientists and political scientists. They will ensure that the documents
are admissible and will erase \"all traces of innocent victims.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1007

Montreal - Since yesterday, Internet users have been able to submit
their first sensitive documents on the whistleblower site QuébecLeaks,
even if they still don\'t know exactly who they are dealing with. The
organization is asking its potential collaborators to submit
\"unavailable\" documents that have not yet been in the hands of
investigative journalists. QuébecLeaks is also asking that you do not
provide opinions or allegations without formal supporting evidence.
QuébecLeaks is a site inspired by WikiLeaks \"made by Quebecers for
Quebecers\" that aims to be a more local platform, where individuals
with privileged access to sensitive documents can make them public
anonymously. QuébecLeaks offers two submission mechanisms. It is
possible to submit documents via a secure HTTPS connection or via the
free software Tor. From the secure HTTPS connection, any Internet user
with even the slightest skill can submit Microsoft Word and PDF files.
Once you agree to browse a site with a problematic security certificate,
that\'s it, as The Canadian Press found. In short, the submission
process is disarmingly simple. The HTTPS process is secure, since banks
use the same protocol, according to a professor in the Department of
Computer Science and Software Engineering at Université Laval. \"If
QuébecLeaks\' goal is to ensure the anonymity of its sources, that\'s
fine, but if the information affects national interests, then we\'re in
a grey area. Sometimes, government intelligence services allow
themselves a certain latitude,\" explains Béchir Ktari. When the
documents start pouring in, one might wonder how the organization -
whose number of members is unknown - will manage the continuous flow of
information and how it plans to sort the data obtained. Just as one
might wonder where QuébecLeaks gets its financial and human resources.
In an email sent to The Canadian Press yesterday, the organization\'s
spokesperson explained that container and content analyses would be
carried out for each document received. Once the system and security
administrators have determined that the documents are secure and that
there are no more traces of the submitter, the information will be
transmitted to \"several collaborators from different fields\" on whom
QuébecLeaks says it can count - lawyers, accountants, professional
journalists, computer scientists and political scientists. The latter
will ensure that the documents are admissible and will erase \"all
traces of innocent victims\". And as for the financing aspect of the
adventure, QuébecLeaks mentioned the possibility of setting up a
structure to collect donations from the public in order to finance, \"if
necessary, the \'full-time employees\' part of the project\". The
organization also said it had been approached by donors and investors.
But all these details will be specified on March 9, maintained the
mysterious spokesperson for QuébecLeaks, who signs all his emails in the
name of the famous linguist and activist Noam Chomsky. The QuébecLeaks
contact once again refused yesterday to grant a telephone interview to
The Canadian Press, arguing that the organization prefers \"to maintain
anonymity and therefore a certain legal security for the members of the
group.\" \"We understand very seriously the need to conduct telephone
and in-person interviews, but for the moment we must stick to email
exchanges,\" wrote \"Noam Chomsky.\" But unfortunately this is what was
proposed to us by our lawyers and advisors.\" In short, a veil of
mystery surrounds QuébecLeaks, which has still not announced the name of
its spokesperson, the Quebec \"Julian Assange.\" His identity was to be
revealed at the official launch of the site, but it was postponed from
February 16 to March 9.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1008

MONTREAL - Since yesterday, Internet users have been able to submit
their first sensitive documents on the whistleblower site QuébecLeaks,
even if they still don\'t know exactly who they are dealing with. The
organization is asking its potential collaborators to submit
\"unavailable\" documents that have not yet been in the hands of
investigative journalists. QuébecLeaks is also asking that opinions or
allegations not be provided without formal proof to support them.
QuébecLeaks is a site inspired by WikiLeaks \"made by Quebecers for
Quebecers\" that aims to be a more local platform, where individuals
with privileged access to sensitive documents can make them public
anonymously. QuébecLeaks offers two submission mechanisms. Documents can
be submitted via a secure HTTPS connection or via the free software Tor.
From the secure HTTPS connection, any Internet user with even the
slightest skill can submit Microsoft Word and PDF files. Once you agree
to browse a site with a problematic security certificate, that\'s it, as
The Canadian Press found. In short, the submission process is
disarmingly simple. The HTTPS process is secure, since banks use the
same protocol, according to a professor in the computer science and
software engineering department at Université Laval. \"If QuébecLeaks\'
goal is to ensure the anonymity of its sources, that\'s fine, but if the
information affects national interests, then we\'re in a grey area.
Sometimes, government intelligence services allow themselves a certain
latitude,\" explains Béchir Ktari. When the documents start pouring in,
one might wonder how the organization, whose number of members is
unknown, will manage the continuous flow of information and how it plans
to sort the data obtained. Just as one might wonder where QuébecLeaks
gets its financial and human resources. Analyses In an email sent to The
Canadian Press yesterday, the organization\'s spokesperson explained
that container and content analyses would be carried out for each
document received. Once the system and security administrators have
determined that the documents are secure and that there are no more
traces of the bidder, the information will be transmitted to \"several
collaborators from different fields\" on which QuébecLeaks says it can
count on lawyers, accountants, professional journalists, computer
scientists and political scientists. The latter will ensure that the
documents are admissible and will erase \"all traces of innocent
victims\". And as for the financing aspect of the adventure, QuébecLeaks
mentioned the possibility of setting up a structure to collect donations
from the public in order to finance, \"if necessary, the \"full-time
employee\" part of the project\". The organization also said it had been
approached by donors and investors. But all these details will be
clarified on March 9, maintained the mysterious spokesperson for
QuebecLeaks, who signs all his emails in the name of the famous linguist
and activist Noam Chomsky.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1009

MONTREAL - Internet users have been able to submit their first sensitive
documents on the whistleblower site QuébecLeaks since yesterday, even if
they still don\'t know exactly who they are dealing with. The
organization is asking its potential collaborators to submit
\"unavailable\" documents that have not yet been in the hands of
investigative journalists. QuébecLeaks is also asking that you not
provide opinions or allegations without formal supporting evidence.
QuébecLeaks is a site inspired by WikiLeaks \"made by Quebecers for
Quebecers\" that aims to be a more local platform, where individuals
with privileged access to sensitive documents can make them public
anonymously. QuébecLeaks offers two submission mechanisms. It is
possible to submit documents via a secure HTTPS connection or via the
free software Tor. From the secure HTTPS connection, any Internet user
with even the slightest skill can submit Microsoft Word and PDF files.
Once you agree to browse a site with a security certificate that is
problematic, that\'s it, as The Canadian Press has found. In short, the
submission process is disarmingly simple. The official launch of the
site was supposed to take place on February 16 but has been pushed back
to March 9.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1010

Montreal - Internet users have been able to submit their first sensitive
documents on the whistleblower site QuébecLeaks since yesterday, even
though the platform has not yet officially launched. QuébecLeaks offers
two submission mechanisms. Documents can be submitted via a secure HTTPS
connection or via the free Tor software. Using the secure HTTPS
connection, any Internet user with the slightest bit of skill can submit
Microsoft Word and PDF files. Once you have agreed to browse a site with
a problematic security certificate, that\'s it, as The Canadian Press
has noted. In short, the submission process is disarmingly simple. One
might wonder how the organization - whose number of members is unknown -
will manage the continuous flow of information and how it plans to sort
the data obtained. Just as one might wonder where the organization,
whose domain name is registered in Arizona, gets its financial and human
resources. Because a veil of mystery surrounds QuébecLeaks, which has
still not announced the name of its spokesperson, the Quebec Julian
Assange. His identity was to be revealed during the official launch of
the site, but this was postponed from February 16 to March 9.
Correspondence between the media and the organization is still signed in
the name of the famous linguist and activist Noam Chomsky. On its
website, the organization asks its potential collaborators to submit
\"unavailable\" documents that have not yet passed through the hands of
investigative journalists. QuébecLeaks also asks that opinions or
allegations not be provided without formal supporting evidence.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1011

From bakery attacks to protest robotics, from clown armies to guerrilla
gardening, from exorcism sessions to the credit card of the Church of
Life After Shopping to the media impostures of the Yes Men, via the
poster corrections of the Billboard Liberation Front and other cyber
sit-ins\... a collage book paints a panorama of this disobedient
international, at the crossroads of art and activism (1). A nebula that
the authors, Stéphanie Lemoine and Samira Ouardi, group together under
the somewhat pompous label of \"artivism\", immediately rejected by
those mainly concerned, defiant of any attempt at institutionalization.
\"We are aware of the contradiction in bringing together under yet
another \"ism\" a galaxy of very heterogeneous practices,\" the authors
readily acknowledge. There is no coherent movement, no formal or
generational unity, but these people are all trying to articulate art
and political action. That is what characterizes this house that has no
walls,\" they explain, trying to sketch out a necessarily incomplete map
of these creative forms of struggle. \"Resistances.\" Some more
artistic, others more militant, they emerged in the mid-90s, in the wake
of the fall of the Berlin Wall and globalization, then September 11,
which established the era of surveillance, or the announced ecological
apocalypse. \"These are stories of resistance. To the savagery of
financialized capitalism, to its consequences on nature, work, human
relations, life as a whole\...\" they write, attempting to trace the
genealogy of this \"artistic anti-discipline\", which is also the
subject of a series of meetings, entitled \"Art \[space\] public\",
offered by the master\'s degree in Cultural Projects in Public Space, at
the Sorbonne, every Friday, starting this evening, until April 1st.
Among other guests, the photographer JR, the pie thrower Noël Godin, the
graphic designer Gérard Paris-Clavel, author of the slogan \"General
Dream\", or the Insurrectional Imagination Laboratory. \"Artivism\"
draws as much from the avant-gardes (Dada, the Surrealists, and
especially the Situationists, Fluxus or Provo, a Dutch anarchist
movement) as from the old carnival traditions, is inspired by the
counter-culture (diggers, yippies, punks, graffiti, raves\...) as by the
traditions of civil disobedience and direct action. \"The modern artist
no longer paints, he protests,\" said Tristan Tzara. These artists share
with Dada a taste for play and caustic derision; but not its nihilism,
convinced that it is possible to transform the world if we give power to
the imagination. \"Do it!\" according to the slogan of the American
activist Jerry Rubin, co-founder of the yippie movement, a credo of
autonomous thought updated by \"Do it yourself!\" punks, and today by
hackers, whose \"role is to explore the limits of the possible\",
according to the definition given by Richard Stallman, father of free
software. Sit-in. From the reconquest of public space to virtual sit-ins
on the Internet, activist art is a prefiguration of another possible
world, where \"the market gives way to free and exchange, individualism
to the collective, disillusioned commentary to concrete struggle, the
spectacle to participation and dialogue, describe the authors. These
practices bring a positive and potentially transformative view of ways
of being together\". The two young women, one a feminist activist, the
other passionate about urban art, began to explore these forms when the
Black Thursday, the BAC (Activist Clown Brigade) and other Antipub
appeared (late) in France. By pulling the thread, they discovered a
multitude of initiatives \"little known in France\", which they wanted
to share. Since then, some practices have become dulled, assimilated by
the market, others have become radicalized. It is the nature of these
forms to constantly reinvent themselves. (1) Artivism, art, political
action and cultural resistance, Stéphanie Lemoine and Samira Ouardi,
éditions Alternatives.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1012

On May 1st, the sunflower stole the show from the sprig of lily of the
valley. Seeds were sown all over the cities of France and the world by
the soldiers of guerrilla gardening. Launched in 2004 by Richard
Reynolds in Great Britain, the movement now unites an international
armada of amateur gardeners who are replanting abandoned urban spaces,
wastelands or sidewalk edges that could accommodate a bulb. The goal? To
make the urban landscape more pleasant, but also to reclaim public
space, confiscated by local authorities and commercial areas. The same
\"do it yourself\" credo is used in the open source project Re:farm the
City, which aims to allow the average person to create their own
apartment vegetable garden and to encourage the production and
consumption of local products. This community of urban farmers is
spreading to New York, Madrid, Barcelona, Buenos Aires and Paris. The
\"terreau-ristes\" of Coloco, landscape architects, advocate for the
reintroduction of biodiversity and the return of wild nature to the
city, by bombarding roofs with their green bombs, balls of locally
harvested seeds, mixed with soil. Valentin Lacambre, pioneer of the
independent Internet, has just launched Seedsburo.org, which invites
everyone to pick seeds and flowers, common goods present in public
spaces, and to document their provenance to prevent private companies
from appropriating the living.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1013

Bromont - Yesterday, the machine triumphed over man on the legendary
American quiz show Jeopardy. Since Monday, Watson, an IBM computer
designed largely in a Bromont plant, has been facing off against two of
the greatest players in Jeopardy history, Ken Jennings and Brad Rutter.
In Watson\'s head: 200 million pages of encyclopedias, dictionaries,
books, newspaper articles, movie scripts and all that. Monday, Tuesday
and last night, 200 IBM employees in Bromont stayed after their work day
for a little popcorn party and, most importantly, to watch their protégé
Watson\'s performance on television. \"We follow it like a hockey
game,\" says Raymond Leduc, chief manager of the IBM plant in Bromont.
\"For us, it\'s not quite a machine: it\'s the fruit of our labor.\" And
they took this game very seriously. During the 30 minutes of
yesterday\'s show, apart from a few murmurs at Watson\'s wrong answers
and a few rounds of applause at his good moves, you could have heard a
pin drop. The plant has been working for four years to develop Watson, a
computer made of 90 IBM Power 750 servers, which together cover 9 square
metres. Some 2,000 components of the computer were designed in Bromont,
including all of its microprocessors. Watson is obviously not connected
to the Internet. Like a grown-up, he can press a button and answer in an
almost human voice. Better yet, Watson has a heart: his winnings - a
million last night - were donated to a charity. The most stressed of all
yesterday? Probably Éric Paradis, chief computer scientist. \"I was
very, very, very nervous!\" he admitted. \"I still had confidence that
he would come out on top.\" Monday night, the showdown ended in a draw.
Tuesday, the computer handily beat its bipedal competitors. And last
night, it was still all fired up: it knew The Simpsons, the nickname
given to South Dakota (the Coyote State) and Laura Bush\'s memoir. Major
mistake When Watson correctly answered the final question, the employees
jumped to their feet. What did go viral yesterday - and in English
Canada, in particular - was Watson\'s small geographical error, which he
said Toronto was an American city. \"The Americans teased me about it,
and asked me if we did it on purpose!\" said Raymond Leduc. \"Watson
learns from his mistakes, and he\'ll never make that one again.\" The
question was actually to identify a city - in the \"American city\"
category - whose two main airports are named after a hero and a battle
of the Second World War. The answer was Chicago. According to David
Ferrucci, Watson project manager at IBM, the error may come in part from
the fact that the categories in Jeopardy can sometimes seek to mislead
participants. As a result, the computer has learned to minimize the
importance of these categories. Other possible reasons for the error:
several American cities are named Toronto, and the Blue Jays play in the
American League. This misalignment of the stars may have tripped up
Watson. By participating in Jeopardy, IBM pulled off a good marketing
stunt, but the underlying idea, says Raymond Leduc, \"is that future
generations of Watsons ultimately help doctors make difficult diagnoses,
or help cities with the difficult management of traffic.\" On Monday,
more than 14 million people watched Jeopardy. On Tuesday, the show
reportedly reached its highest ratings in six seasons. Video of the
event can be viewed at cyberpresse.ca/watson

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1014

For Valentine\'s Day, thrill your other half by giving them Body Heat,
an iPhone app that\'s supposed to raise their body temperature.
Connected to a \"personal massager\" (a euphemism for vibrator, a word
that\'s probably banned from the prudish Apple Store), Body Heat, banned
for those under 17, lets you control the machine with your fingertips,
sensually stroking the smartphone\'s touchscreen: from top to bottom to
vibrate faster, from left to right to vibrate harder. If you put two
fingers in, you can create more sophisticated vibration patterns and
save the ones that will have the most effect, from the subtle \"Deep and
steady\" tickle to the wild gallop (\"Galloping horses\"). An infinite
variation of pleasures, tailor-made, far from the on-off binary. Body
Heat was designed by a woman, Heather Kelley, a digital artist, feminist
and designer of experimental games (including the famous Lapis, a DS
game aimed at helping women perfect their masturbation technique to
achieve orgasm, via the stimulation of a cute little rabbit). The
designer seduced the sex toy brand OhMiBod, which specializes in musical
dildos, dildos connected to MP3 players that allow you to vibrate to the
rhythm of your favorite hits, also available in a club version (a small
embedded tampon that reacts to ambient sound, in concerts and
nightclubs). If the iPhone application is cheap, the little toys to plug
into it will cost you from 50 dollars to three times more for the
wireless version. Fortunately, generous hackers have taken things in
hand. Among them, Kyle Machulis, aka qDot, a robotics engineer, expert
in sex toys and more generally in \"teledildonics\", meaning
remote-controlled sex, is an activist for pleasure for all. A supporter
of open source, he lists and dissects all the technologies with an
erotic vocation on his blog Slashdong. From Microsoft\'s Kinect that
allows you to feel an avatar\'s virtual breasts, to the Mojowijo that
transforms Nintendo\'s wiimote into a remote stimulator, to the t-shirt
that vibrates when you send a text message or the sofa that quivers
according to the activity of a Twitter account. In other words, gadgets
but also augmented reality research projects like iFeel_IM, a harness
capable of reproducing embraces via the Internet. Machulis regularly
organizes \"Do It Yourself\" workshops to learn how to hack products
from the sex industry, or to make your own customized toys. Cheap and
open source computer equipment (Arduino), some basic electronics and
programming, and a little imagination are enough. \"The goal is for
individuals to develop their sex toys based on their own needs and to
explore new sensations,\" says the author, who believes that adult toys
of the future will integrate more biometric data (heart rate, pressure,
temperature, etc.). Heather Kelley and Kyle Machulis are both regulars
at Arse Elektronika, an annual conference organized by the Viennese
collective Monochrom, which takes stock of the future of our
technologized frolics and other fucking machines, exploring the impact
of sex on technological innovation. At the last edition in October in
San Francisco, they organized the Six Feet Under Club, inviting a
volunteer couple to lock themselves in the promiscuity of a coffin to
give free rein to their libido, broadcast on a big screen, via the
prying eye of a surveillance camera. The call for contributions for the
next edition has just been launched. The theme \"Screw the System\" will
address issues of sex, technology and class struggle.
www.ohmibod.com/bodyheat www.slashdong.org
www.monochrom.at/arse-elektronika

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1015

This is the story of an exciting adventure that ends badly. That of the
rise of WikiLeaks experienced from the inside by Daniel Domscheit-Berg,
close to Julian Assange for three years. That of the break-up between
the two men in September 2010. Number 2 describes in a book the kitchens
of the site that hit the headlines worldwide against a backdrop of
emotional turmoil. Perfect ingredients for a novel. Inside WikiLeaks,
behind the scenes of the most dangerous website in the world, is
released today in Germany by Econ Verlag. And next week in ten countries
including France, by Grasset. This highly anticipated story was
surrounded by a thousand precautions to prevent leaks. No interviews
before publication. No proofs entrusted to journalists. Reading at the
publisher. However, as of Sunday, small excerpts were circulating on
Cryptome.org. Ironically, it was through this site, which also publishes
sensitive documents, that Daniel Domscheit-Berg heard about WikiLeaks in
September 2007. At the time, he says, he lived in Wiesbaden and worked
in computer security. Alerted by a link, he connected to the site\'s
chat. Julian Assange quickly gave him \"jobs\". Involved in open source
and a member of the Chaos Computer Club (CCC), Daniel was delighted to
have him come to their conference in Berlin in December 2008. It was
their first meeting. He was attracted to the character, he was \"cool\".
Then it was Mendax, the famous computer hacker, co-author of the cult
book Underground (see page 4). His conference at the CCC, with twenty
people in a basement, was a flop. A year later, same place, same
Assange, 900 listeners. In 2009, the scenario repeated itself, Assange
triumphed. In the meantime, WikiLeaks has distinguished itself with its
explosive revelations. MODUS OPERANDI In January 2008, WikiLeaks
published the accounts of the Cayman Islands subsidiary of the Swiss
bank Julius Bär. The first leak for Daniel Domscheit-Berg. The test by
fire. Public pressure pushed the institution to withdraw its complaint.
\"That\'s how we were propelled to the forefront in the space of a few
days, at the beginning of 2008. Without Julius Bär\'s complaint, it
would never have happened so quickly.\" It\'s David versus Goliath. For
a long time, Daniel writes, there were \"almost\" only two of them
behind the scenes, juggling pseudonyms night and day (Daniel signs
\"Schmitt\" or \"Jay Lim\", from the \"WikiLeaks Donor relations\"
service). Their lawyer is a volunteer, like the collaborators scattered
around the world. There will be no salary, even after the influx of
donations. At the end of the story, there will be only two permanent
people: the \"technician\" and the \"architect\". The single server is
soon no longer enough. The two men and \"an old computer\" embark in a
Mercedes Estate for a 24-hour, 2,100 km tour to install them in various
locations in Europe. The duo is refining their method. After attacking
the banking system, it is the turn of the sects with pieces on
Scientology, provided by the \"Anonymous\" (Internet activists).
Distrust becomes the order of the day. Contacts are made in telephone
centers late at night. Assange arranges to meet in incongruous places.
They will soon be juggling with encrypted mobiles and deliberately
evading details in front of journalists who do not dare to admit that
they do not understand everything (\"This is the principle of terrorism,
but also of bureaucracy: without elements, the adversary cannot
attack.\") \"We wanted our structure to remain secret and to surround
our team with a thick mystery, on the model of Scientology.\" The
initial principle obeys an ideal of transparency: to publish everything
that reaches them \"provided that it has a minimum of relevance\" (which
they manage to do until the end of 2009) like all the emails of the
imprecators (\"the attacks stopped very quickly\"). Not to try to find
out where it comes from. \"We could not and did not want to know who our
sources were.\" The arrest of soldier Bradley Manning in May 2010 after
the broadcast of the video \"Collateral murder\" (American blunder in
Baghdad) will be a cold shower. THE MEDIA WikiLeaks quickly decided to
collaborate with newspapers to attract attention. The target was
initially the popular press and journalists identified in editorial
offices. \"For us, the important thing was not so much to know how true
a piece of information was, but to know how to sell it.\" At first,
Daniel continues, journalists were only given part of the resources,
then all of them. But the media also served as leverage to serve WL\'s
ideals, such as the short-lived project of a political movement to fight
against Internet censorship in the world. \"We had also learned that to
make things happen, it was essential to cross a certain threshold of
perception at the media level. And it worked all the better when someone
could embody the problem, give it a face and a personal inflection.\"
But the number of whistleblowers grew, the site was overwhelmed with
documents and the partnerships did not always go as planned. The
strategy went up a notch with the publication of the Afghan war logs in
July 2010. \"We wanted to involve the media at the right time and stay
in control. We needed good partners. We agreed on the New York Times.
For strategic reasons, we wanted an American media outlet, why not the
biggest one while we were at it.\" The Guardian and Spiegel were also
brought into the loop. No way to hire more. \"But journalists behave
like dogs who show their teeth to defend their bone as soon as they fear
that a scoop will be taken away from them.\" Assange, Daniel says, was
becoming more and more uncontrollable at the same time, giving
journalists a meeting alone in London. \"More and more imprudent about
the confidentiality of the documents,\" he passed the cables to an
Icelander who passed them on to the press. The circle of inducted
newspapers would nevertheless expand with the publication of the Iraq
Warlogs, then the diplomatic cables in the fall of 2010. Five exclusive
partners decide what is worthy of public attention, regrets Daniel.
\"The current publication strategy has already strayed enormously from
the basic principles of WikiLeaks. Too much, I think.\" Julian ASSANGE
But Daniel was no longer part of it. His relations with Julian had
deteriorated since February 2009. Julian, who could not bear to see him
presented as a co-founder, called him a \"media whore\". The opacity of
the finances and the fragility of the site also weighed on him. Their
stay in Iceland at the beginning of 2010 where they planned to create a
paradise of freedom of the press turned into a nightmare. The rest of
the time where the four of them lived together was a smelly \"mess\",
strewn with moldy food. Assange reprimanded him. Later, he would
threaten to \"hunt\" and \"kill\" him. This is their last meeting, they
will only speak to each other via chat. Daniel returns to Berlin, meets
his future wife. He is a wounded man, who has given his all to the point
of having half of WL\'s hourglass tattooed on his back, a portrait of
his former muse. For him, Assange is a mythomaniac, \"capable of telling
three different stories about his past\" like claiming that his hair
went white at 14 because of gamma rays. \"Julian reinvented himself
every day, like a hard drive that is reformatted daily, as if he were
going back in order to start over again.\" Selfish, eating up other
people\'s share: \"Julian\'s behavior was often similar to that of a
person raised by wolves.\" A personality that he sometimes \"hates\":
\"Free thinker, energetic, brilliant. Paranoid. Power-hungry.
Megalomaniac.\" For his part, Daniel thought with the \"architect\"
about an \"optimal mode of operation of a leak platform\", more
transparent, more neutral, without the pitfalls experienced at
WikiLeaks. On January 27, he opened OpenLeaks. Because on September 15,
2010, at 2 a.m., the last message had fallen: \"You\'re suspended\",
\"you are emptied\".

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1016

After free love and \"Vive le Québec libre!\", there is linux.fm, a web
radio where you can listen to the source code of a free software. The
radio randomly broadcasts the source code of the latest stable version
of linux, file by file, read 24 hours a day by a synthetic voice! And
if, after a few seconds of listening, you don\'t find it geeky enough
(or unbearable), we suggest you open the radio in two tabs of your
browser at once! http://linux.fm

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1017

Here are some tips and features that will help you use Facebook more
securely and protect your personal information. CREATE LISTS To prevent
your coworkers, parents (or kids!) from knowing all about your drinking
excesses the night before, just create groups. When you want to update
your profile, just click on the little padlock to decide who you want to
share with (or not)! (Account Menu - Edit Friends List - Create List)
CHECK WHO IS VIEWING YOUR ACCOUNT This option lets you see in which city
and with which internet browser the last connections to your account
took place. If you see that someone is connecting from a computer other
than yours, hurry up and change your password! You can also activate an
option that lets you receive an email each time someone connects to your
account from an unknown computer. (Account Menu - Account Settings -
Account Security) AVOID DUBIOUS FRIENDS A pretty stranger wants to
become your Facebook friend? Her slightly sexy profile pictures are a
dream? When it\'s too good to be true\... It\'s more likely that she\'s
a fraudster trying to obtain your personal information and will probably
try to get money from you with wild stories! KEEP YOUR DATA Did you know
that you can download a copy of your data (your photos and videos, the
posts on your wall and all your messages) at any time? Very practical if
you have lost the original photos, but also for those who want to close
their account; you can keep the messages you have sent! (Account Menu -
Account Settings - Download your data) USE FACEBOOK EMAIL It will soon
be possible to receive messages on Facebook with an address like
yourname@facebook.com. The service is being rolled out little by little:
when you receive the invitation, follow the instructions to validate
your address; do it quickly to have the best address, especially if
several people have your name! You will be able to receive emails sent
by your Facebook friends in the Messages section of your profile; other
emails will be in the \"Other\" section. An effective way to filter spam
and other unwanted messages, in addition to no longer having to consult
your Facebook page and your email account to receive your messages.
ACTIVATE SECURE BROWSING Another option that is not yet available to all
users: the HTTPS connection, which allows you to transmit your personal
information with a level of security similar to that recommended for
banking transactions or online purchases. This function could prevent
certain games and functions from working; but it prevents anyone from
intercepting our exchanges with Facebook servers. A good thing in
internet cafes\... \* \* \* + Finds RUSSIAN GROCERY Nostalgic images of
advertising for Russian food products. Often more exotic than
appetizing! http://bit. ly/dKNT71 \* \* \* Behind the miracle + We
relive Those who have followed with emotion the saga of the collapse of
the San José mine in Chile (and who hasn\'t?) and who want to know more
will want to download the iPad application \"Behind the miracle\" which
complements and enhances the documentary of the same name directed by
Orlando Arriagada. The application is available in three languages, in
the App Store and contains videos exclusive to the iPad. The application
is free. Search for Behind the miracle in the App Store \* \* \* Fax
without fax + We fax You absolutely need to send a fax, but you don\'t
have a fax machine? faxZero can help you out. The service allows you to
send two faxes of less than three pages per day for free to Canada and
the United States, with an ad on the header page; you can send a Word or
PDF file. For a few dollars (payable by PayPal), you can eliminate the
ads, send faxes to other countries, and send more pages. Don\'t forget
to respond to the confirmation email! http://faxzero.com \* \* \* Bad
rap + We do rap YouTube is full of excellent videos. But there is also
some terrible stuff. A funny site offers a collection of videos of white
people rapping badly. You don\'t have to understand the lyrics to laugh
or feel a strange unease. You have to see the angry guy whose video is
filled with images of his dog to understand that not everyone can be
Eminem. Making good rap is an art that is not easy! http://bit.
ly/eDtDZr \* \* \* Music broken down + We listen to Brett Domino and his
sidekick Steven Peavis have fun reinterpreting trendy songs with an
impressive array of instruments: kazoos, iPhone, cowbell, theremin,
stylophone, ukulele and many others. Visit the Videography section for
the very deadpan music videos that let you see how each song is put
together. Don\'t miss the hip-hop medley or the chart-topping one (from
Ke\$ha to the Black Eyed Peas to Justin Bieber). My favorite video is
Justin Timberlake\'s medley: watching Brett read the lyrics is
hilarious! www.brettdomino.com \* \* \* The geekiest radio + We don\'t
listen to After free love and \"Vive le Québec libre!\", there\'s
linux.fm, a web radio where you can listen to the source code of free
software. The radio randomly broadcasts the source code of the latest
stable version of Linux, file by file, read 24 hours a day by a
synthetic voice! And if after a few seconds of listening, you don\'t
find it geeky enough (or unbearable), we suggest you open the radio in
two tabs of your browser at once! http://linux.fm

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1018

Every second, a staggering number of digital files are downloaded from
the Internet. Ben Baker-Smith\'s Infinite Glitch automatically generates
a constantly changing audiovisual stream from this exponential mass of
files. This automatic program, made entirely with free software,
fragments, degrades and recombines images and sounds, in a chaotic
landscape of data made unreadable. \"A representation of this media
deluge that overwhelms us and from which we can retain very little.\"
http://infiniteglitch.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1019

What are the most popular free software? Free, efficient and regularly
updated, free software is increasingly used by businesses and
individuals. The site CommentCaMarche has drawn up a list of those most
often recommended by universities and major schools. First surprise: the
software that comes out on top of the top 10 of this survey is not an
office software but an audio editing tool, Audacity. This software,
mainly used to retouch sounds or clean up music files digitized from a
vinyl record, is frequently used in language courses and in the
introduction to music on the computer. The OpenOffice.org office suite
naturally comes in second place. A free alternative to Microsoft Office,
it offers a word processor, a spreadsheet, presentation software,
drawing tools and data management. It can also read and save files in
Office formats. Third place on the list is occupied by VLC, probably the
most powerful video file player of the moment: it recognizes all file
formats, including those of DVDs and subtitled films and can retrieve
and save all kinds of video streams. Second surprise: Apple\'s software
QuickTime and iTunes appear in 4th and 6th position in the top 10 while
they are not strictly speaking free software, even if they are free\...
The rest of the list obviously includes the Firefox web browser (5th)
but also the photo editing tool PhotoFiltre (7th) and the image
conversion utility XnView (10th). Finally, note the presence of two very
useful utilities on PC: 7zip (8th), which allows you to compress and
decompress files, and PDFCreator (9th), which adds the function of
converting a document to PDF to the printing options.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1020

For three weeks, an unprecedented media effervescence has been catching
up with two decades of silence, lies and ignorance about the nature of
the Tunisian regime. The January revolution has opposes a scathing
denial to all the speeches of complacency or complicity that it is
useless to list here: a wall of shame is currently being built on
Facebook to archive the succession of shameful declarations by French
officials since Ben Ali took power in 1987. How can we explain that so
many Tunisian voices, for nearly twenty years, have alerted public
opinion without being heard? How can we understand that after so many
reports from the Tunisian League for Human Rights relayed by the
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), Amnesty International,
Reporters Without Borders, Tunisia has continued to pass for the
friendly country vaunted by advertising slogans? Ben Ali first
succeeded, within the country, in reducing authorized public speech to a
level of mediocrity rarely achieved. As a child, I experienced the
"medical coup d'état" of November 7, 1987 in Tunisia and grew up under
the Ben Ali regime. Like all the relatives, spouses, and children of
human rights activists, journalists, and opponents---Sihem Ben Sedrine,
Hamma Hammami, Radhia Nasraoui, Taoufik Ben Brik, among many others---I
was, more than the rest of the Tunisian population, and perhaps earlier
than them, exasperated by the regime's perverse prose because we were
confronted with the gap between public discourse and the price that
these opponents of the regime paid individually---hunger strikes,
imprisonment, harassment of all kinds, arbitrary trials. In 1992, after
leaving Tunisia, where I grew up, to study in France, each return was
first and foremost the shock of contact with the language of the
dictatorship. With all due respect to Frédéric Mitterrand, Ben Ali\'s
Tunisia was indeed the least ambiguous of dictatorships, for those who
took the trouble to open their eyes and not cover their ears. From
arrival at the airport to the most miserable of shops, in the glitzy
hotel lobbies, on the roads, posters of Ben Ali adorned with slogans
glorifying the \"Artisan of Change\": \"Together behind Ben Ali\" or
\"Ben Ali, we love you\". In taxis, it is impossible to avoid the
omnipresent RTCI, Radio Tunis Chaîne Internationale: between the
thousandth rebroadcast of a cheesy Western pop hit - Whitney Houston or
Elton John - and a distressing exchange with a listener, the news flash:
tirelessly, before the paltry briefs of international news, a series of
communiqués read by the \"journalist\" mouthpiece of the regime, such
as: \"President Zine El-Abidine Ben Ali constantly encourages national
associations and organizations to adhere with total responsibility and
efficiency to public life and the global development process. \"We have
not only stifled a people by depriving them of any space for speech and
protest, but also by producing an unprecedented newspeak, a monstrous
hybridization of technocratic verbiage, pompous lexicon, and a delirious
use of capital letters: the \"Era of Renewal\", the \"Path of
Development\", the \"Promotion of Change\" have blackened thousands of
pages of official newspapers that no Tunisian has bothered to read for
many years. It would be urgent to archive all issues of La Presse, the
Ben Ali propaganda organ where one could read stylistic feats such as:
\"Tunisian journalists highly praised President Zine El-Abidine Ben
Ali\'s constant concern to further promote the Tunisian media landscape,
in line with the qualitative change in the communications sector, in the
world, in order to serve the ambitions of Tunisian society, preserve its
civilizational identity and further increase Tunisia\'s influence, on a
regional and international scale, within the framework of the commitment
to credibility, objectivity and allegiance to Tunisia.\" How could we
have thought for so long that the symptoms of dictatorship were only
political assassinations in the street? The Tunisian case testified with
a form of genius of the baseness that dictatorship also manifests in the
instrumentalization of the speeches that Western opinions and leaders
want to hear. Thus, at a time when more and more voices, Tunisian and
Western, began, in the 1990s, to warn about the human rights situation,
the Tunisian regime invented a mind-boggling propaganda in favor of
human rights, promoting freedom of expression at all costs in a country
where almost no Western news newspaper was available in the hall of an
international airport, where Libération and Le Monde entered in dribs
and drabs, regularly banned for several months. On the other hand,
Tunisians were subjected to pathetic, even comical, prose on a daily
basis. Even as all opposition newspapers were gradually being crushed,
while the right of association was being suppressed, while no
demonstration was ever authorized, while political opponents were being
harassed, one could read in La Presse in 2010: \"Tunisian journalists
celebrate this holiday in the commitment to fulfill the role that is
theirs in the consecration of the attributes of a modernist and open
society based on the principles of freedom, democracy, dialogue,
pluralism and acceptance of opposing opinions.\" This determination
draws its strength from the political will of the president who
continues to give the information and communication sector special
attention and constant support and who works tirelessly to further
strengthen the role of this sector in driving the pluralist democratic
process, through the consecration of free, pluralist and objective
information that meets the aspirations and interests of the citizen and
that interacts with his concerns and ambitions, on the basis of the
principle that responsibility is the corollary of freedom. I also have
the surreal memory of a Free Software Festival held in the marina of a
tourist town: empty plastic chairs topped with white banners with
slogans, a few guys in Bermuda shorts and flip-flops, slumped behind a
computer, screen off, and tourists in shorts strolling in front,
indifferent. The women\'s cause, an extraordinary guarantee to Western
public opinion, has also been totally manipulated by the Ben Ali regime.
Here is what we could read for example in La Presse in 2003: \"Opening
the work of the congress, chaired by Chadlia Boukhchina, president of
the National Union of Tunisian Women (UNFT), Mr. Kamel Haj Sassi,
Secretary of State to the Minister of Culture, Youth and Leisure,
stressed the interest that young Tunisian girls have enjoyed since the
change and the strategic place that they occupy in the scale of
priorities of the social project of the Head of State, noting that young
women are pioneers in the action led by women\'s associations in terms
of supervision, rooting the values of Change and raising awareness of
the challenges of modernity. \"Even the environmental cause has also
been recuperated: while the development of mass tourism in the hands of
the ruling clique has accelerated an unprecedented destruction of the
coastline, all Tunisians have had the opportunity to be graced, even in
the most modest town, with a Boulevard de l\'Environnement, a sinister
avenue, vaguely decorated with three miserable palm trees and a few
withered laurels. This absurd and empty language imposed within the
borders of a padlocked country has been echoed, outside, and
particularly in France, by the discourse of many political leaders,
communication agencies and influential editorialists. The lexical
quibbles about the nature of the Tunisian regime are the glaring symptom
of the Franco-French inability and refusal to distinguish the signifier
from the signified. Ben Ali\'s Tunisia served up on a golden platter all
the democratic signs that the West wanted to see: women with their hair
down, beaches welcoming tourists allowed to show off in monokinis, full
supermarkets, businesses welcomed with open arms, a liberalization of
services, active cooperation in the fight against terrorism. The history
of Franco-French relations over two decades is one of willful blindness,
of an acceptance of all the flashy signs of democratic tinsel. It is an
example of complacency with regard to the discourse of communication, of
the capacity of democracies to remain fixed on a set. The end of the
Tunisian dictatorship is a grotesque image of what could have been
called a \"operetta dictatorship\" if so many men and women had not paid
the price of real oppression for nearly a quarter of a century. A
slicked-back despot fleeing by plane, a regent of Carthage taking refuge
for a few days in a cardboard hotel in Disneyland with a ton and a half
of gold under her arm: when the signs of the end of the old regime
became so glaring, it became impossible for France, the media and
political leaders to keep their \"talking points\" on Tunisia.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1021

Whether we love them or fear them, we must admit that
alter-globalization ideas have renewed contemporary politics. The
criticism of free trade, the idea of a global tax in favor of the South,
the recognition of environmental constraints, the fight against free
software, the rejection of junk food, the questioning of productivism,
the renewal of direct democracy, the struggle of landless peasants,
undocumented migrants, victims of finance or climate refugees, all these
themes, all these words, all these fights have been put on the agenda by
this informal international that has challenged triumphant liberalism,
challenged governments, made international organizations move and shook
up the traditional left. In some twenty years of existence, through
continuous work punctuated by major popular events such as the protests
against Davos, the G8 or the social forums inaugurated in Porto Alegre,
the alters have imposed their agenda and advanced their demands on all
fronts. What is their record, where are they going, what do they want?
Economist, activist, former vice-president of Attac, Gustave Massiah
offers them a roadmap for the beginning of this century. The awareness
of the finiteness of the planet and the harmfulness of unbridled
finance, he explains, opens new perspectives for the movement. Contrary
to what their enemies sometimes want us to believe, the alters are not
the umpteenth version of old leftism, steeped in Marxism and
military-revolutionary dreams. The logic of the movement, explains
Massiah, is the demand for rights for all. Far from the historical
materialism of sad memory, the alters extend, two centuries later, the
great promise of 1789 and the Declaration of Rights. With these only
differences: instead of only concerning public freedoms, the rights
claimed touch on all areas of life, politics, work, gender, ethnicity or
the environment, and apply to everyone, from the Parisian bobo to the
first peoples of the Amazon. Essentially democratic - and therefore
anti-authoritarian - alter-globalization finds before it an adversary
and an ally. The liberalism that still governs globalization is a
clearly identified enemy; the progressive movement that Massiah calls
the \"Green New Deal\", which designates the social-democratic policies
mixed with ecology defended by the parties of the institutional left, is
itself a potential ally. Massiah explores the avenues of a critical but
productive dialogue between these two forces. The French left, which is
preparing its presidential campaign and which must renew its discourse,
will not find its way without reading this manual of green and pink
strategy.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1022

It was ten years ago, on January 15, 2001. Two Americans, Jimmy Wales
and Larry Sanger, laid the foundations of Wikipedia. A slightly crazy
project: to design a free online encyclopedia, written by Internet
users, to which everyone, experts or novices, could contribute, by
creating, completing or correcting articles using a tool inspired by
free software, the \"wiki\", allowing collaborative work. Initially
improbable, Wikipedia has prospered. Today, it is the fifth most visited
site on the Web. In the United States, more than one in two adult
Internet users consult the online encyclopedia, according to a Pew
Internet survey. The number of articles exceeds 17 million, in 270
languages. However, the encyclopedia remains a UFO. It is the only Web
service of this importance that has not \"monetized\" its audience
through advertising. It is non-profit, and still relies on the
enthusiasm of hundreds of thousands of volunteers to grow. \"It is part
of the culture of sharing and free of charge of the Web\'s opinion
leaders,\" according to Pierre Chappaz, one of the main French
entrepreneurs of the Net. \"The company founded in parallel by Mr.
Wales, Wikia, financed our first servers. But in 2003, we sorted things
out and created a foundation, the Wikimedia Foundation, which owns the
machines, the domain names and the brand,\" says Florence Devouard,
president of the foundation between 2006 and 2008, a \"Wikipedian\" from
the very beginning. \"We started calling for donations at the end of
2002. At the time, there were only a few dozen of us contributing to the
articles,\" she explains. The hierarchy remains barely perceptible. The
founders were sidelined. \"Mr. Sanger wanted a priori control of the
articles,\" according to Ms. Devouard. Mr. Wales remains in high demand
by the media, but \"only has a representative role,\" she adds. The
current president is a rather discreet German of Chinese origin, Ting
Chen. The project is decentralized. Around the foundation gravitate
around thirty national \"Wikimedias\", fairly autonomous, responsible
for animating the community of contributors, raising funds, etc. \"At
the beginning, there was Anglo-Saxon governance. Now, everyone lives
their own life,\" notes Ms. Devouard. This operation has its cumbersome
features. \"A contributor can contest a vote by our board of directors.
Hence sometimes lengthy decision-making processes,\" notes Adrienne
Alix, president of Wikimedia France. Tensions exist: \"We want to be
welcoming to contributors whatever their opinions. It\'s not always
easy,\" adds Ms. Devouard. Investing and convincing Wikipedia still has
its flaws, highlighted in the media: errors, articles that are not
objective enough, those that announce the death by mistake of
personalities\... \"Wikipedians have developed software to track down
slip-ups. If there is a risk of defamation, a regular contributor can
delete the article. If the contributions are far-fetched or advertising,
we discuss them among ourselves. But there are things that slip through
the net, especially in biographies of little-known people, less
\"monitored\" by the community\", recognizes Rémi Mathis, former student
at the Ecole des Chartes, major contributor in French on the history of
Europe in the 17th century. To avoid slip-ups, German and American
Wikipedians have established an a priori validation procedure for
bibliographies of living people, as long as the contributor who modifies
it is a \"newbie\". There are also the risks of recovery, such as these
books \"copy-pasted\" from Wikipedia articles, which are supposedly on
sale on Amazon. \"It\'s all the more deplorable because they are poorly
made. There\'s nothing we can do about it: Wikipedia content is
royalty-free; it can be reused by anyone,\" says Ms. Devouard. But
Wikipedia is changing, becoming more professional. Following the call
for donations launched at the end of 2010, the 2011 budget doubled to 16
million dollars (12 million euros). A large part will go to the third
server center that is to open in the United States, with the hiring of
IT specialists. As the audience increases, it is necessary to invest in
infrastructure. Wikimedia France also hired a person in accounting in
2010, to relieve the volunteers. Attracting contributors, if possible
specialists, is also a priority, particularly in France. With others,
Mr. Mathis is trying to convince cultural institutions to entrust
Wikipedia with part of their wealth (photos, texts) or to write
articles. An agreement was signed in April 2010 with the National
Library of France, to make available to Internet users 1,400 texts that
have fallen into the public domain. \"Now, we are taken seriously,\"
says Mr. Mathis, who says he has contacts with the National Archives and
the Château de Versailles. \"The reluctance is at the management level,
who are worried about the risks of exploitation by third parties of
their content thus put online,\" acknowledges Ms. Devouard.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1023

After free Quebec and free software, long live free books? Framabook
offers French e-books on free software, free of charge and without any
catch. You can download books like a beginner\'s guide to the Ubuntu
operating system, a biography of Richard Stallman (the inventor of free
software) and other more technical computer books. Don\'t want to read
on screen? Paper books are on sale in good bookstores. Do you like the
project? Here again, you are free to make a donation! www.framabook.org

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1024

Naked as a worm, you end up on Pluto, the city of a thousand delights,
the Las Vegas of the solar system, ruled by Elastic Versailles, a
corrupt artificial intelligence. Naked on Pluto is a text adventure game
on Facebook, integrating the personal data of the player and his
\"friends\" as elements of this thrilling interactive fiction. To
participate, all you have to do is register with your Facebook account.
After buying a decent outfit (cowboy hat, diving suit, etc.) with the
chips won at the casino, the player sets off to explore this paradise of
consumption and entertainment, strolling through its palace, its
fountains, swaying in a shady club, making friends with the sycophantic
bartender, chatting with insipid robots or characters who will seem
strangely familiar to him, without knowing whether they are computer
programs or human beings. The atmosphere of the place, only suggested
with the help of textual descriptions, contributes to this disturbing
strangeness. He will have to find a key to unlock the toilet door, steal
the identity of one of his Facebook friends by donning a moustache, get
lost in the maze of inhuman shopping centres, at the risk of getting
lost in the dark and abandoned corners of this \"brave new world\". The
player is alone, but he can invite his friends to join him to perform
certain actions. The combination of fictional elements with private data
and the manipulation of information extracted from the Facebook account
makes the game both immersive and very destabilizing. Naked on Pluto
examines the limits and nature of social networks from the inside,
questioning the way in which these interfaces shape our relationships,
the commodification of friendly ties, advertising targeting, and
especially the \"phenomenal quantities of information\" that we provide
to these databases, literally exposing ourselves. \"This fact is known
to Facebook users, but we found that there was a difference between
being aware of this situation and experiencing it outside the closed
gardens of this software,\" explains Aymeric Mansoux, creator of the
game with Dave Griffiths and Marloes de Valk. With this playful
metaphor, the three artists want to confront the user with the
functioning of social networks, and the problem of sharing data, whether
voluntary or not. A process that is often opaque, especially since
Facebook launched the \"connect\" function, which allows you to log in
to more or less intrusive third-party services with your Facebook
identity. Naked on Pluto makes a point of explaining in complete
transparency how the player\'s data is used. The game, which is open
source, does not store any information on its servers, with the
exception of your Facebook ID, and the data generated during the game
can be deleted upon simple request. Rather than a radical act, such as
the virtual suicide advocated by the Seppuku or Web 2.0 Suicide Machine
projects, Naked on Pluto seeks to reveal the mechanisms of Facebook, by
operating from within the system. The text adventure game, an outdated
literary form, lends itself ideally to the subject. It was already used,
according to Aymeric Mansoux, \"to convey various forms of contemporary
satire, such as Hampstead which addressed the economic and social
conditions of the London suburbs, or Bureaucracy, which transformed a
simple mission into a Kafkaesque adventure.\" http://naked-on-pluto.net
http://pluto.kuri.mu/

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1025

New electronic tablets, electric cars, other social networks, cell
phones transformed into credit cards, the year 2011 is likely to be
fertile in new products for consumers. La Presse Affaires has listed 11
consumer products that are likely to attract attention. Consumers on the
lookout for trends, get your wallets ready! 1- The Daily iPad Daily
Media mogul Rupert Murdoch wants to launch the first major daily
available only on iPad. For several months, his team of about a hundred
journalists and experts on Apple\'s electronic tablet has been preparing
the release of the Daily, which would be sold for US\$0.99 per day and
US\$4.99 per month. To carry out this project, NewsCorp is working
closely with Apple - to the point where some rumors have it that the
Daily and the second version of the iPad will be launched simultaneously
at the beginning of the year. Other sources are talking instead of a
solo launch on January 17 for The Daily. Some of the content of the
first 100% iPad daily will be supplied by the other media of NewsCorp,
the media conglomerate of Rupert Murdoch which notably owns the Times of
London, the Wall Street Journal and the Fox News television network.
Vincent Brousseau-Pouliot 2- Facebook Stock market After the silver
screen in 2010, the stock market in 2011? The social network Facebook
has resisted the siren song of the stock market for several years now.
And it plans to do so again until 2012, according to the techno investor
Peter Thiel, one of the first backers of Facebook. But rumors of an IPO
in 2011 resumed last October when Facebook split its shares by five - a
decision that often suggests an IPO. According to estimates, Facebook is
worth US\$50 billion. Facebook more than doubled its revenues in 2010,
which went from around US\$800 million to US\$2 billion. Facebook\'s IPO
is the most anticipated in the tech sector since Google\'s in 2004.
However, the company is not short of funding: it has just obtained
US\$500 million from Goldman Sachs and a Russian investor, which could
delay Facebook\'s IPO until 2013, according to the New York Times.
Vincent Brousseau-Pouliot 3- Google Me Social network Does Google want
to compete with Facebook? Its CEO, Eric Schmitt, swears that it does
not. But for the second year in a row, Google will launch its own social
network. After the failure of Buzz in 2010, Google Me should be launched
in March or April, according to the specialist website Mashable. If
Google is so interested in social media, it is in particular because of
the meteoric growth of Facebook, which has become the busiest site in
the world after its own. Facebook increased its traffic by 55% in the
United States over the past year, which has forced Google to respond in
the social networking arena. On the stock market, Google is hoping to
have a better year in 2011. Last year, its stock depreciated by 4.2%.
Vincent Brousseau-Pouliot 4- Diaspora Social network Do you want to
share your moods and photos on a social network without giving up your
privacy like on Facebook? Four math students from Columbia University in
New York may have found the solution. On Diaspora, all users are masters
of their server and give access to it to their friends. Diaspora, which
launched an initial experimental version last November, should be
available to the general public in 2011 and will operate in open source
code. The site is already being presented by the media as the
anti-Facebook of social networks. Its co-founders Dan Grippi, Maxwell
Salzberg, Raphael Sofae and Ilya Zhitomirskiy had the idea to create a
decentralized social network in February 2010 following a lecture by a
Columbia law professor on the dangers of Facebook in terms of privacy.
In a few weeks, the four students raised more than \$200,000 through the
Kickstarter funding site. Among their donors: a certain Mark Zuckerberg,
co-founder of Facebook. Vincent Brousseau-Pouliot 5- GM Volt and Nissan
Leaf Hybrid and electric cars Is 2011 the year of the electric car? Two
highly anticipated models will hit the roads of Quebec this year. The GM
Volt will be on sale in Montreal, Quebec City and Gatineau during the
summer. How much will this plug-in hybrid electric car cost, which has a
range of 580 kilometres and consumes only 1.02 litres of gasoline per
100 kilometres? GM has not announced a Canadian sale price, but the car
costs \$41,000 US in the land of Uncle Sam. Nissan will respond by
launching its Leaf, an all-electric car, between September and December
2011. Communauto subscribers will be among the first drivers of the
Nissan Leaf. The car-sharing service will buy 50 cars at a unit price of
approximately \$34,000. Vincent Brousseau-Pouliot 6- Nintendo 3DS Video
games and 3D technology After the big screen and the small screen last
year, the 3D craze will invade video games in 2011. Nintendo will launch
its long-awaited 3D portable console on February 19 in Japan, then on
March 20 in several countries including Canada. For \$299, players will
be able to enjoy a 3D environment without the hassle of the glasses that
usually accompany it. Will the Nintendo 3DS have the same impact on the
video game industry as the Kinect, the controller-free console launched
by Microsoft last November? Only time will tell. Nintendo executives are
at least hoping that the launch of their new portable console - the
event of 2011 in the video game industry - will shore up the company\'s
finances. For the last six months (April and September 2010), the
Japanese company has seen its revenues drop by 34% and its profits fall
by 48% compared to the same period in 2009. Vincent Brousseau-Pouliot 7-
The telephone/credit card Banking services Gone are the days when you
had to take your credit card out of your pocket to pay for groceries.
Soon, a cell phone will suffice. In 2011, most new cell phones on the
market (notably Nokia) will adopt near field communication technology,
which allows you to pay by passing your cell phone over a terminal at
the checkout. Financial institutions will also get in tune with this new
technology, which only allows transactions of less than \$50. \"We will
definitely have things to announce on this subject in 2011,\" says
Nathalie Genest, spokesperson for the Mouvement Desjardins.
Petro-Canada, Cineplex, Tim Hortons, Loblaws and soon Walmart are ready
to accept payments by cell phone. \"The big challenge with this new
technology will be acceptance at points of sale. Will merchants be ready
to adopt it?\" says Éric Paquet, Senior Director of Personal
Transactional Solutions at National Bank. Consumers should be aware that
they will have to learn how to lock their cell phones. Otherwise, the
bill could quickly mount up without the owner knowing. Vincent
Brousseau-Pouliot 8- Renewable natural gas Energy On December 21, Quebec
company EBI-Environnement announced that it will power its garbage
collection trucks\... with garbage. EBI transforms biogas from landfills
into natural gas. And it wants to start fueling its trucks with it this
year. EBI is far from alone in the sector. \"Renewable natural gas,\"
which is cheaper than solar and wind energy, is likely to provide fierce
competition to other renewable energies in 2011. Many companies may be
willing to pay a premium for \"green\" natural gas, which can also be
transported in existing pipeline networks. \"Follow the scientific
innovations in natural gas in 2011 and the political support it will
receive,\" warns clean technology analysis firm Kachan&Co, which
predicts that natural gas produced from biogas will create a buzz this
year. Philippe Mercure 9- iPad 2 vs. PlayBook Tablets With sales
forecasts of 50 million units, digital tablets will be one to watch in
2011. The BlackBerry PlayBook is among the most anticipated. Jim
Balsillie, co-founder of RIM, believes, not very humbly, that it \"will
redefine what digital tablets should be used for\", upon its release in
late March-early April. Its cutting-edge technical specifications, QNX
software, low retail price and increased interaction with BlackBerry
phones will appeal in particular to the business community. A threat
that Apple takes seriously: Steve Jobs, its CEO, should present a second
generation of the iPad that is more affordable and better equipped in
terms of hardware. Alain McKenna, special collaboration 10- Groupon
Group purchases on the Internet What was just a start-up in November
2008 is now the Internet phenomenon of the hour. Groupon, which turned
down a \$6 billion takeover bid from Google last fall, could go public
in 2011. This would be the crowning achievement of group buying, which
offers Internet users discounts of 50 to 90% on packages offered by
local merchants. For a few weeks now, Groupon has also been available in
the Montreal area. With sales estimated at \$500 million in 2010, Andrew
Mason, its founder, compares Groupon\'s potential to that of Amazon and
eBay in their early days. This explains its accelerated expansion
strategy: 33 million subscribers and 3,000 employees, spread across 35
countries. Alain McKenna, special collaboration 11- Google Chrome OS
Dematerialized ultraportables After the web, mobility and TV, what does
Google have left to reinvent? Personal computers! In January, Google
will test 20,000 Cr-48 ultraportables powered by Chrome OS. It's a
30-year-old industry dream: Everything from office suites to
communications tools is stored online, on remote servers. These
ultraportables carry only the bare minimum: a browser and a handful of
device drivers. Acer and Samsung will follow next summer with the first
consumer models, equipped with Wi-Fi and 3G connectivity. The potential:
For a fraction of the price, 60 percent of the world's desktops can be
replaced by a Chrome OS product, according to Linus Upson, Google's vice
president of Chrome OS. Alain McKenna, special contributor

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1026

The iPad is said to have been a flop at Christmas. The noise has invaded
the Web since Orange announced that it had sold only \"nearly 30,000\"
internet tablets in December, including a little over 20,000 of Apple\'s
latest toy, and the rest for the Galaxy Tab from Korean Samsung. The
operator may well say it is \"rather satisfied\", but it has not
convinced many people. Especially given the incredible media hype (yes,
including Libération) which predicted a flood of tablets under the
Christmas trees. Gadget. So, top or flop? \"It\'s a good start, but not
excellent\", summarizes Jean-Philippe Illarine, at Samsung. According to
the GFK institute, \"around 100,000\" tablets were sold in December in
France and \"around 450,000\" in 2010 (excluding mobile operator
stores), the vast majority of which were iPads. A score in line with
forecasts. And very honorable for a product that is so young (seven
months), confusing (at the same time computer, internet browser, e-book,
games console, etc.) and especially very expensive (550 euros on average
last year). In short, a gadget initially acclaimed by urban and rather
well-off technophiles. \"After the buzz, we have to calm things down!\"
they say at GFK. The craze is there, but it is not the heist of the
century. It takes 15 million pieces sold for a technological product to
represent a mass market. We will get there, but it is not yet the
case.\" On the other hand, the flop was definitely there for mobile
operators. They were hoping to hit the jackpot by transposing their
miracle recipe inherited from the telephone: subsidizing the device (the
price of the iPad at 600 euros went down to 279 euros), on condition of
subscribing to a mobile Internet subscription that allows you to surf
anywhere thanks to 3G technology. Not very tempting when you want to
offer the object for Christmas. \"It\'s a poisoned gift,\" mocks an
expert. \"It amounts to offering the obligation to pay 30 euros per
month for two years.\" That is more than the price of an unsubsidized
iPad. Consumers were not mistaken. \"Orange\'s 30,000 copies is clearly
not a lot,\" mocks a competitor, who has nevertheless also noted the
absence of \"exceptional enthusiasm\" for tablets. It must be said that
the iPad, because of its large size, is mainly used at home or in cafés,
where you can surf for free via Wi-Fi. Which limits the interest of a 3G
subscription. The exorbitant rates of the operators have not helped
matters: with the exception of the SFR discovery offer (8.90 euros per
month), the packages cost between 25 and 39 euros per month, in addition
to the mobile phone bill. Not easy to swallow in times of crisis.
Especially since Orange, SFR and Bouygues have been much heavier handed
than in the United States, where the biggest tablet packages do not
exceed 19 euros per month. Price breakers. Samsung has been the victim
of this policy, since its Galaxy Tab, very compact and equipped with a
telephone function, was sold exclusively by the operators. \"There is
work to be done here and there,\" says Jean-Philippe Illarine very
diplomatically. The Korean company will also launch larger models next
month, which will this time be available \"naked\", without a mandatory
subscription. These youthful mistakes should not, however, hinder the
growth of these strange connected objects. Firstly because consumers
will finally have a choice (there were only four brands of tablets at
Christmas). Several dozen new products are expected, including the
luxurious iPad 2 and the Blackberry tablet, planned for spring. But
above all, the mass arrival of price breakers, including the Taiwanese
king of computers, Acer. Like most of Apple\'s competitors, they are
banking on Android, Google\'s free and open source software. And they
intend to accelerate the democratization of tablets, already started
last year by the French Archos and its 250 euro models. GFK predicts
that sales will double in France this year with 960,000 units sold and
420 million euros in turnover. Not bad for a start.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1027

Who would dare deny the importance of social media today? They seem to
us to be essential, constantly fueled by viral contamination. We run
between MySpace, YouTube, Facebook, Classmates, Twitter, etc., anxious
to be present everywhere. The founder of LinkedIn (70 million users),
Reid Hoffman, was able to state that \"MySpace is the bar, Facebook is
the barbecue at the bottom of the garden, and LinkedIn is the office\".
These social media have multiplied: Flickr, Myheritage, Trombi, Last.fm,
Plexo in the United States, Viadeo in France, Xing in Germany, Jobssip
in Spain, Renren Xiaonei in China (an imitation of Facebook which
translates as \"people on campus\"), and even in Africa, on mobile
phones: iYam.mobi, launched by Fritz Ekwoge. Facebook, which is just six
years old, is increasing its number of users by a million per quarter,
according to the huge and unverifiable figures that are announced,
reaching 600 million at the end of 2010. Its revenues, nearly 635
million in 2009, are expected to reach a billion by 2010. According to
the American institute Hitwise, Facebook could boast 3% more unique
visitors than Google and more page views. At the same time, the
announcement of the Google Me network has been postponed once again.
Facebook is said to constitute 25% of Internet traffic in the United
States. While the desire to socialize is unlikely to diminish, nor is
the feeling of solitude of our individualistic masses, how can we
announce today the predictable decline of Facebook? There are many
reasons. Facebook is first and foremost a network of teenagers looking
for friends - it has become a kind of competition to display more and
more of them - and like all the fads with which successive generations
of young people identify, with clothing trends, musical groups or
dances, the Facebook generation will grow old and pass the baton. We can
already hear younger people declaring that Facebook is uninteresting. We
observe the same ephemerality in the succession of fashions for digital
tools. Thus, digital watches, which had rightly invaded the market, have
almost disappeared. Fashion has returned to large hands on large dials.
We hardly talk anymore about the game Second Life, which was so
successful three years ago, with its land speculation, and which minted
its own currency, convertible into dollars. Everyone wanted to create
their avatar there, while large institutions and multinationals invested
in it to open shop windows and shops. Despite the current taste for
transparency and authenticity, networks of friends such as Facebook are
increasingly arousing distrust. It is true that by exhibiting their
private lives in this way, many young people naively do not care about
themselves, and that this personal data can immediately be used for
better or for worse. A recent survey conducted by Iligo, a French agency
that analyzes consumer behavior, reveals that 80% of Internet users do
not trust the privacy policy of the social media they use. In the case
of Facebook, the most prominent, numerous controversies have forced its
leaders to back down and make apparent concessions. The fact remains
that it is complicated to get out of it and that if you manage to do so,
the site \"reassures\" you by telling you that if you change your mind
and want to re-register later, you will immediately find all the
personal data that you have put there - precisely the ones that you have
just tried to permanently erase to protect your private life and your
future! These two sides of Facebook, one of friendly friendliness, the
other of underhanded commercial exploitation of this private data, are
terribly contradictory. Tim Berners-Lee, the inventor of the Web, just
twenty-five years ago, has just published an insistent warning on the
\"closed nature\" of the Facebook platform. We will add that despite
Facebook\'s recent announcement to now offer an easy, fast and
user-friendly mode of exchange that would make the \"old email\"
obsolete, this network offers little innovation in its functionalities.
In addition, it lacks depth, dedicating itself to superficial exchanges
without content. Finally, I can\'t see how this platform will overcome
for much longer the obvious contradiction between the naive
relationships of adolescents and adult corporate or professional uses,
such as political, commercial, humanitarian campaigns, literary,
scientific, historical, academic debates, etc. Yet another two sides of
Facebook that don\'t match. The clienteles are not the same, nor are the
activities, and this platform is clearly too large not to soon appear
fragile and irrelevant. In addition, the commercial abuse of
exploitation of personal data, which encourages many users to leave
Facebook, has given rise to an alternative initiative, that of Diaspora
in New York, in May 2010, which offers a free software platform with
open source code, which allows all users to control the orientations,
policies and uses of the site. Social media will not disappear, but they
will become more segmented, to better meet the more specific needs of
more defined groups. And in the fight between the digital empires
Microsoft, Google and Facebook, it is the latter which is the most
fragile, despite the excess of its current successes, or rather because
of this superficial and unstructured craze. Communications without
content are like water, which successively spreads into communicating
vessels. Another metaphor: viral infections are like schools of fish or
flocks of parrots, they move quickly and in bulk. Facebook\'s near
future is more than uncertain. Driven by its success, it is not clear
how it could reconfigure itself by better targeting its objectives and
functionalities before losing the favor of the next wave of adolescents
and adult users who have clung to it.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1028

It\'s the phonal fight\... A fratricidal fight between smartphone users.
For a long time, it was believed to be confined to iPhone users vs.
Blackberry users. Wrong! There are nearly 370 models of these
smartphones with which you can surf the Internet, send emails, play
games, listen to music, show off or take photos. To make your choice,
there\'s no need to dwell on the color of the case or the ringtones. No,
what matters is the operating system (OS). The novice must decide
between Android (Google), iOS (Apple), Blackberry (RMI), Windows
(Microsoft), Symbian (Nokia) and many others. But beware! This choice is
anything but trivial. Opting for an operating system is like joining a
clan, a family. One that despises others and fiercely defends its
favorite device, convinced that its OS is the best in the world. And
this choice says a lot about the user\'s personality and values. Group
directory. The members of this tribe are easily identifiable. Their
gestures give them away: by dint of frantically tapping on their touch
screens, sliding them and zooming with two fingers, their manual
dexterity has increased tenfold. Incorrigible fans of Apple products, it
is not uncommon for them to be over-equipped with the brand\'s products:
iMac, iPad, iPod\... But before joining the iPhone clan, a hazing takes
place. The device being \"high-end and designer\", you have to dig deep
into your pocket to pay for it. Expect to pay 629 euros, excluding
operator offers, for the iPhone 4. Young dynamic executives working in
advertising or communication love to show off their screen, \"the best
resolution on a smartphone\", their super camera, their emails and
especially their \"apps\". With over 250,000 of these downloadable
programs, the Apple Store is the most stocked of all operating systems.
Between those that imitate farts, burps, lightsabers, downing a pint of
beer and the slew of games, you can count on them to liven up your
evenings. And all this paraphernalia attracts customers. A little extra,
not insignificant: according to a survey conducted by the online dating
site OkCupid, users of Apple\'s smartphone, both men and women, have
more sexual partners. But let\'s calm down: if you\'re a porn fan, it\'s
better to avoid opting for the iPhone. Steve Jobs being known for being
very puritanical, racy apps are banned from the Apple Store. The same
goes for if you\'re a fan of French manicures. It\'s impossible to type
with claws that are too long. If the iPhone lends itself to messing
around, its big rival, the Blackberry, is no joke. This smartphone is
for people who work, who need to be at their peak efficiency all day
long, no matter where they are. So no time to waste on childish things.
Those looking for fun apps should move on. As one user sums it up, \"the
diversity or multiplicity of applications is poor, but if I had wanted a
toy, I would probably have opted for an iPhone.\" In exchange,
Blackberrists can have a blast synchronizing their calendar and opening,
viewing, and saving Jpeg, PDF, Word, Excel, and PowerPoint files. BB
fans, as it\'s called, operate in a vacuum. Thanks to BBM (Blackberry
Messenger), an instant messaging service, they communicate only with
each other. In addition to the suit and tie, they can be recognized by
the phrase \"I\'ll BBM you later,\" said between two meetings. Another
clue to spot them: the little red light that flashes with each new
email. Among the users, there are VIPs with top-secret conversations. It
is impossible to monitor electronic communications (SMS, calls, emails)
that pass through the device. Data encryption is such that some
countries, such as Saudi Arabia, have banned it. Not recommended for the
unscrupulous or those with big fingers. The BB is equipped with a
keyboard full of microkeys and its small scroll wheel can be fragile.
The operating system launched by Google is that of Geeks, those addicted
to new technologies. For them, no fuss: Android is the future. On the
Internet, we can no longer count the number of blogs or enthusiast sites
that rave about the thing (Frandroid.com, Android-france.fr,
Lesapplicationsandroid.fr). On their calendar (a Google calendar, of
course), a big red cross on 2011, the year when their protégé should
overtake the iPhone in market share. And they have reason to believe it:
95 smartphone models already run on Android. So many devices (HTC
Desire, Sony Ericsson Xperia X10, Samsung Galaxy S\...), with different
designs and especially different prices. As a result, everyone can buy
one without stopping at the pawnbroker. Which probably explains why the
Android community includes quite a few anti-Apple people, who accuse
Steve Jobs of monopolizing the market with expensive products. They, on
the contrary, have sworn an oath to Google, its many digital tools
(Gmail, Google talk, Google Maps\...) and its Opensource operating
system (users can improve the OS themselves). Android is not recommended
for those with a bit of a stomach: each version is named after a dessert
(Cupcake, donut, éclair, IceCream\...) that can whet their appetite.
Since the apps can be downloaded outside the Android Market, those who
are not used to tinkering on the Internet can get lost in the many sites
that offer them. Having arrived after the start of hostilities,
Microsoft\'s operating system does not yet benefit from an
ultra-mobilized community. But according to the advertisements, \"Less
in mobile and more in life\", \"It\'s time for a phone to make us forget
the phone\", the people targeted are the antiphonards, this population
not provided with a smartphone and who find it a bit silly to spend
their time with their eyes glued to their screen. Here is something that
may help the undecided: according to a video posted on the Internet, the
HTC mobile equipped with Windows Phone 7 is, compared to the iPhone and
Android, the most resistant to the barbecue fire. Not bad. The users,
quite numerous, are depressed: their operating system will not have a
new version, only updates. However, Symbian (Nokia) has 22% of market
share in France, just behind the iPhone. Consolation prize? Symbian
remains the best-selling operating system in Asia.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1029

These software programs are free, but they are usually pushed to you by
a consultant who is selling you his time. However, you recently admitted
to having spent far too much on IT consulting. Government employees
understand very well that your bag is empty. They themselves use free
software in their basements, well aware that Microsoft software is too
expensive. An intervention on your part with Microsoft would be
appreciated, both by the low-paid employees and by your devoted
government buyers. \*\*\* Paul-André Desjardins - Quebec, December 13,
2010

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1030

The President of the Treasury Board is being courted by proponents of
free software. Allow me a word of warning: be careful, Ms. Courchesne,
Santa Claus does not exist! This software is free, but it is generally
pushed to you by a consultant who is selling you his time. However, you
recently admitted to having spent far too much on IT consulting.
Government employees understand very well that your bag is empty. They
themselves use free software in their basements, well aware that
Microsoft software is too expensive. An intervention on your part with
Microsoft would be appreciated, both by the low-wage earners and by your
devoted government buyers. Paul-André Desjardins Québec

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1031

WikiLeaks manipulates the media WikiLeaks\' indiscretions cause deaths,
but WikiLeaks washes its hands of it. Julian Assange does not publish
any information without submitting it to prestigious newspapers (The
Guardian, Le Monde, Der Spiegel, El Pais, The New York Times) which
judge its credibility and relevance. Why so many newspapers? Are
journalists more competent when they are spread across several
newspapers? The official reason is to avoid favoritism, but it may mask
another. It may be to lower the threshold of tolerance for the
\"sensitive\" nature of certain information. The danger posed by the
publication of certain information is altered by the argument \"if we
don\'t publish, our competitor will.\" Assange is very familiar with the
mechanics that govern the media and the preponderant place of the
\"scoop\" in it. Michel Bellemare, Quebec Non-free software The
President of the Treasury Board is courted by the proponents of free
software. Allow me a word of warning: be careful, Ms. Courchesne, Santa
Claus does not exist! These software programs are free, but they are
generally pushed to you by a consultant who sells you his time. However,
you recently admitted to spending far too much on IT consulting.
Government employees understand very well that your bag is empty. They
themselves use free software in their basements, well aware that
Microsoft software is too expensive. An intervention on your part with
Microsoft would be appreciated, both by the small employees and by your
devoted government buyers. Paul-André Desjardins, Quebec Lake Placid
rather than Amman\... Contrary to what is said, the mountain is not the
biggest handicap for 2022. We can always find one. The major obstacle -
and much higher! - is Vancouver 2010. The IOC will never give the
Olympic Games to Canada 12 years after Vancouver. Forget it, it\'s
impossible! That\'s why Lake Placid\'s offer is so important. Not only
do we settle the case of the cursed mountain at a bargain price (for
free!), but we also push the Americans out of the picture to put them on
our side in a binational presentation and no longer exclusively
Canadian. One stone, two birds. By the way, Lake Placid is not much
further from Quebec than Parkcity was from Salt Lake City. Jacques Noël,
Quebec

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1032

Human beings are protocol animals. Our behaviors obey, consciously or
not, codes. Until recently, protocol was an instrument of hegemonic
power. The more we mastered the rules and their construction, the more
we controlled the population. The writing and policing of protocols was
the privilege of the elites. The Internet is today the place through
which humanity is becoming aware that freedom requires the collective
resumption of the construction and reinvention of protocols. The name
WikiLeaks will remain as one of the milestones of this democratization.
In the word \"WikiLeaks\", \"Leaks\" is important: these are the
\"leaks\" thanks to which the decision-making circles that once appeared
solid as rock liquefy and lose their splendor. But \"Wiki\" is just as
significant: it means that everyone can contribute to this active
demystification of protocols. What do the Internet and diplomatic
circles have in common? These are two worlds governed by very strict
protocols, but in an inverse manner. Diplomatic rigor is a surface
veneer that allows all hypocrisies, low blows and betrayals. The
protocol is staged, while the maneuvers remain in the shadows. The rigor
of the Internet is on the contrary found in everything that we do not
see: in its source codes, in its universal standards for writing
programs and processing information (for example, on the Internet, the
RFC, TCP/IP or HTML standards). What is immediately visible, on the Net,
is a joyful chaos, turpitude, freedom of expression, all the
manifestations of the human kaleidoscope. We have long been vaguely
familiar with the codes that govern the more or less hushed life of
embassies, these more or less tacit rules of etiquette, precedence and
relations between States and their emissaries. We are less familiar with
the recent operating logic of digital technology. Wikileaks is the
product of hacker culture. A hacker is not a pimply villain who causes
World War III by tinkering with computers. A hacker is an actor in
reality: his practice is based on reverse engineering. What does that
mean? It involves deconstructing programs, rules or protocols built by
groups with a monopolistic vocation to understand how they are built at
the source, in order to modify them and become an actor in his own
communication instruments, if possible in Opensource, that is to say in
accordance with the spirit of free software, modifiable by all those who
take the trouble to know the digital logic of the protocols. But hackers
do not limit this way of doing things to digital programs: by spending
most of their time on the Internet, the younger generations now have the
algorithm in their skin: they understand to what extent our worldly
protocols, our political and social rules, our behaviors, our tastes,
our beliefs, our identities have been constructed and are instruments of
control. The diplomatic world, that of leaders, is certainly not sacred.
Many have repeated it in their analyses, the WikiLeaks leaks are not
very surprising in content. But let us not forget that \"the message is
the medium\", according to the famous and always enlightening formula of
Marshall McLuhan. The strength of the current historical event lies in
the form rather than in the substance. This event is said thus:
\"digitalism\", namely the global codification of our representations in
binary electronic sequences is a new universal DNA. This digitalism, by
contrast effect, increasingly brings to light a complementary human
tendency, \"crealism\", the desire to become autonomous, to freely keep
oneself away from automatisms, while taking back control of a democratic
recreation of protocols. In English, this is called Empowerment; in
French, capacitation. The old elitist analog worlds of double talk and
bluff, especially those of politics, can only be shaken. The message
that WikiLeaks sends to those who govern is the following: now that you
are using digital logic to organize the world and control the masses,
know that the masses will be able to have access, like you, to this
universal protocol to divert it or unmask its hegemonic uses. An
inevitable democratization, unless we put in prison all those who know
computer programming, a temptation that seems to itch some leaders,
including in France. He who rules by code will fall by code. Those who
intend to control the masses by biometrics, electronic control, must
expect to see digital protocols turn against them thanks to the
vigilance of a few, provided that the Internet and the press remain
free. A freedom that must not only be technical, but critical and
constructive. Because let us never forget, with Orwell, that
digitalization alone, without collective creativeism, will not lead to
more democracy, but only to the best of all possible worlds. Latest work
published: \"On the Art of Being Free in the Age of Automata\" (Max
Milo, 2010).

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1033

Los Angeles - Visa, MasterCard, Swiss Bank\... Some of the world\'s
largest financial companies are victims of computer attacks from the
group Anonymous, which says it wants to avenge the arrest of WikiLeaks
founder Julian Assange. A form of protest carried out using free and
legal software, reports our correspondent. The arrest of Julian Assange
triggered a wave of virtual attacks that temporarily disrupted the sites
of Visa, MasterCard and PayPal last week. This web guerrilla warfare is
led by a group of hundreds of Internet users called Anonymous, a sort of
leaderless swarm that spontaneously decides to cause harm to an
organization deemed to be at fault. So far, Anonymous\'s trophy case has
been rather meager: the symbolic actions of the hackers targeted the
sites of companies and did not affect transactions. Researcher and
Internet specialist Evgeny Morozov wrote in Foreign Policy that these
virtual demonstrations were more like an occupation than a destructive
attack against a given enemy. \"Like the sit-in, this technique is
intended to briefly disrupt a service or institution in order to make a
point. Just as we don\'t criminalize all sit-ins, I don\'t think we
should criminalize all disruptions.\" The online protesters targeted the
websites of MasterCard, Visa, and PayPal after they stopped accepting
micropayments sent to WikiLeaks. The activists\' outrage also stems from
an apparent duplicity in the criteria of these financial giants. They
have long authorized online transactions from the Knights Party (the
current incarnation of the Ku Klux Klan), most porn sites, and
anti-abortion activists who encourage violence against doctors and their
patients. Not very sophisticated The attacks are conducted using a free,
open-source software called Low Orbit Ion Cannon (LOIC). Users can use
the software to launch an attack directly on a site or voluntarily make
their computers available to a group carrying out an attack. But these
actions are not very sophisticated, according to experts. And those who
take part in them do not always mask the IP address of their computer,
which allows them to be identified. Two teenagers have been arrested in
the Netherlands in the last few days. University researchers in the
Netherlands summed up the situation in these words: \"The technique of
the attacks is a bit like overwhelming someone with a large number of
letters, but writing your address on the back of the envelope.\" Julian
Assange has attracted the sympathy of Internet users since his arrest:
yesterday, Time magazine said that his candidacy for the title of
\"Person of the Year\" had received the most votes in an online poll.
The editors of Time are to announce their choice tomorrow. The reaction
to Julian Assange\'s arrest is far from the only area of interest for
these hackers. Interviewed by The Guardian, one of them said he was in
it to make money. \"For example, if you had a DVD of Harry Potter 7,
Part 1, you could make \$12-15,000 selling it (to hackers),\" he wrote.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1034

It was during an international meeting on online marketing organized at
the end of November in Sydney, Australia, by Nine MSM, a famous online
portal in the country of Nicole Kidman, partially owned by Microsoft. In
2006, the same Cole had predicted there the fall of the MySpace kingdom,
another space for sharing life and creations. And inevitably, the
prophecy having come true, the audience was hanging on his every word,
reported recently the daily newspaper The Australian. Fragmented
networks \"The same thing will happen to Facebook,\" warned the thinker
of digital and the dematerialization of human relations, \"but it will
take more time. This network will not, however, be replaced by a single,
large community, but rather by fragmented networks.\" Cole likes to brag
and project himself into the future. The present, however, seems to
prove him right, as evidenced in recent months by the emergence of a
multitude of new social networks that seek to fill gaps in privacy,
correct errors in the marketing of private data, but also explore the
facets of communication forgotten by the empire created in 2004 by Mark
Zuckerberg, who sees the number of his detractors grow at the same speed
as his hegemony. Diaspora and the others The wave of protest is gaining
momentum and Diaspora intends to take advantage of it to take flight by
displaying its colors: decentralization, free software and data
security. Just like Insoshi, AppleSeed or Elgg, Diaspora, imagined by
four students from the Courant Institute of New York University (NYU),
aims to be an open exchange network, but also hosted on the computer of
each of its members - rather than on foreign servers. Thus, personal
information (photos, videos, thoughts out loud about life, the world and
current events) are kept at home, for greater respect for privacy, say
the creators of the network. The New York Times has also described this
project as the anti-Facebook, the source code of which was delivered to
programmers on the Web last September to begin dissemination. An appeal
for donations to support this development raised \$125,000 in just a few
weeks. The idea is appealing. And the same should be true of Folkdirect,
another social space launched last June that offers to communicate with
friends without being bothered by targeted advertising. The place
presents itself as \"the site for real friends\" and also sets the table
from the start: your personal data will not be transmitted to third
parties. Two shadows on the picture however: the decoration of the
places, and a pale graphic inspired by Facebook through which it is also
possible to go to invite your friends to join us on Folkdirect. No more
than 50 friends Another place, another spirit: Path, itself, proposes to
digitally produce social cement by exchanging photos, in portable
format, and this, through a smartphone application launched in November.
Exit, however, the incessant quest for friends or subscribers, specific
to Twitter and Facebook. This social network, created by a former
high-ranking Facebook executive, Dave Morin, and the co-creator of
Napster, Shawn Fanning, simply wants to facilitate the sharing of
\"important moments\" of human existence with the people who really
matter, with a limit of 50 friends, not one more, per account. Photos,
yes, but not only that: this is the proposal made by One Social Web, a
sort of aggregator of social networks and other online communication
tools whose advent is announced for the summer of 2011. The European
telephony giant Vodafone is behind this all-in-one which aims to bring
together, on the model of the decentralized network, all of an Internet
user\'s activities: email address, photo or video sharing page, Twitter
communication thread\... Open to the end, its current development is
also done in this spirit, like Diaspora. Multiple personalities and art
Against the current of the sacrosanct transparency, which participates
in the construction of social networks, Hibe, for its part, is rather
betting on the multiple to convince of its relevance. The exchange space
therefore invites you to multiply the profiles according to your needs:
one to talk with your friends about \"drinking\", one for your work
colleagues, one for your family\... the whole thing is not
interconnected for obvious reasons. Less pretentious, despite its
origin, but certainly more relevant, the social network of the Louvre
Museum, which has just seen the light of day, also offers another way of
considering socialization in the digital age. How? By creating a
community of interests around the works that bring the illustrious
institution to life. The members of this network are invited to provide
comments on exhibitions, to distribute articles on art, to present
videos and to comment on those of others in order, ultimately, without
thinking too much about it, to slowly move the boundaries of social
universes whose current mutation is certainly not about to end. \*\*\*
-joindiaspora.com/ -dogfood.insoshi.com/ -elgg.org/ -www.folkdirect.com/
-onesocialweb.org/ -hibe.com/ -communaute.louvre.fr/

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1035

And these social media have multiplied: Flickr, Myheritage, Trombi,
Last.fm, Plexo in the United States, Viadeo in France, Xing in Germany,
Jobssip in Spain, Renren Xiaonei in China (an imitation of Facebook
which translates as: people on campus), and even in Africa, on mobile
phones, iYam.mobi, launched by Fritz Ekwoge. Facebook itself, which is
just six years old, seems to increase its number of users by a million
per quarter, according to the staggering and unverifiable figures that
are announced, reaching 600 million at the end of 2010. One in two
Canadians is said to have registered, to the point where we speak of
Canada \"as a Facebook Nation.\" And its revenues, nearly 635 million in
2009, should reach a billion by 2010. According to the American Hitwise
Institute, Facebook could boast 3% more unique visitors than Google and
more page views. At the same time, the announcement of the Google me
network has been postponed once again. Facebook is said to constitute
25% of Internet traffic in the United States. Fashion effect While the
desire to socialize, just like the feeling of solitude of our
individualistic masses, is not likely to diminish, how can we announce
today the predictable decline of Facebook? There are many reasons for
this. Facebook is first and foremost a network of adolescents in search
of friends \-- it has become a sort of competition to display more and
more of them \--, and like all the fads with which successive
generations of young people identify, with clothing trends, musical
groups or dances, the Facebook generation will age and pass the baton.
We can already hear younger people declaring that \"Facebook is
boring!\" We are seeing the same ephemerality in the succession of
fashions for digital tools. Thus, digital watches, which had rightly
invaded the market, have almost disappeared today. Fashion has returned
to large hands on large dials. We hardly hear any more about the game
Second Life, which was so successful three years ago, with its land
speculation, and which minted its own currency, convertible into
dollars. Everyone wanted to create their avatar there, while large
institutions and multinationals invested in it to open shop windows and
businesses. Lack of trust Despite the current taste for transparency and
authenticity, networks of friends such as Facebook are increasingly
provoking distrust. It is true that by exhibiting their private lives in
this way, many young people naively do not care about themselves, and
that this personal data can immediately be used, for better or for
worse. A recent survey conducted by Iligo, a French consumer behavior
analysis agency, reveals that 80% of Internet users do not trust the
privacy policies of the social media they use. In the case of Facebook,
the most prominent, numerous controversies have forced its leaders to
back down and make apparent concessions. The fact remains that it is
complicated to get out of it and that, if you manage to do so, the site
\"reassures\" you by telling you that if you change your mind and want
to re-register later, you will immediately find all the personal data
you have put there - the very data that you have just tried to erase
permanently to protect your privacy and your future! These two faces of
Facebook, one of friendly friendliness, the other of underhand
commercial exploitation of this private data, are terribly
contradictory. Contradictions Tim Berners-Lee, the inventor of the Web,
just 25 years ago, has just published an insistent warning on the
\"closed nature\" of the Facebook platform. We will add that despite
Facebook\'s recent announcement to now offer an easy, fast and
user-friendly mode of exchange, which would make the \"old email\"
obsolete, this network offers little innovation in terms of its
functionalities. In addition, it lacks depth, devoting itself to
superficial exchanges without content. Finally, I can\'t see how this
platform will overcome for much longer the obvious contradiction between
the naive relationships of adolescents and adult corporate or
professional uses, such as political, commercial, humanitarian
campaigns, literary, scientific, historical, academic debates, etc. Here
again are two sides of Facebook that do not match. The clienteles are
not the same, nor are the activities, and this platform is clearly too
broad not to soon appear fragile and irrelevant. In addition, the
constantly threatening commercial abuse of personal data exploitation,
which is causing many users to leave Facebook, has given rise to an
alternative initiative, that of Diaspora in New York, in May 2010, which
offers a free software platform with open source code, allowing all
users to control the orientations, policies and uses of the site.
Segmentation Social media will certainly not disappear, but they will
become more segmented, to better meet the more specific needs of more
defined groups. And in the fight between the digital empires Microsoft,
Google and Facebook, it is the latter which is clearly the most fragile,
despite the excess of its current successes, or rather because of this
superficial and unstructured craze. Communications without content are
like water, which successively spreads into communicating vessels.
Another metaphor: viral contaminations are like schools of fish or
flocks of parrots, they move quickly and in bulk. The near future of
Facebook is more than uncertain. Carried along by its success, it is
hard to see how it could reconfigure itself by better targeting its
objectives and functionalities before losing the favor of the next wave
of adolescents and adult users who have clung to it. \*\*\* Hervé
Fischer - President of the International Federation of Multimedia
Associations and author of Le Choc du numérique (VLB, 2001)

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1036

In the shadow of the shocking news about cheating and tax evasion that
fueled our feeling of being covered in leeches this week, this one went
virtually unnoticed: the Quebec government will promote the use of free
software in its computer park. Described like that, there is nothing in
this news to get you out of preparing meat pies and doing holiday
shopping. On the other hand, it is quite a Christmas for companies like
Révolution Linux in Sherbrooke, invited to a buffet at which the giants
were pretty much the only ones gorging themselves. The federal firearms
registry and its colossal billion-euro bill, the Quebec Health File -
which is still not operational even though the bill has now reached 800
million (42% more than expected - that rings a bell. It rings false. The
framework policy that the provincial government is putting forward does
not provide it with complete assurance of preventing such cost
overflows. But it opens up to an alternative management method adopted
by several countries concerned with maximizing their investments in IT.
With free software, no licenses to pay for each government entity and
for each individual user. This software can be copied completely
legally. Ministries, institutions such as hospitals or schools can
exchange it for free. The use of free software has already begun within
the Quebec apparatus. It is emerging from the margins to become one of
the references. \"Managers have risked their careers by believing us and
trusting us when the reflex of the majority was rather to go to
reputable companies, regardless of performance and costs. This
recognition is a huge victory for small businesses like us. It also
ensures that we can no longer be ignored,\" rejoices the president of
Révolution Linux, Benoît des Ligneris. This young Sherbrooke company
sells its expertise in Canada, the United States and Europe. It has
penetrated the markets of emerging countries such as Brazil and China.
Révolution Linux was associated with a project by the Commission
scolaire de la Région-de-Sherbrooke, which delighted the students, staff
and management of the Saint-François building at La Montée high school.
Seven classes at this school were equipped with computer terminals for a
fraction of the cost of purchasing 231 conventional computers, taking
into account many technical considerations. \"We studied 21 options. The
most efficient and least expensive was this one. Installing computers
would have involved parallel investments in ventilation or air
conditioning. \"We would have had far fewer workstations for students
with the same budget,\" says Philippe Caron, deputy director of the
information technology department at the CSRS. Terminals generate less
heat than a computer and are less energy-hungry. Putting 32 computers
into service in a single classroom would have required reinforcing the
electrical circuits. \"These are details that escape us, as laypeople,
but which greatly affect the equipment that we can make available to our
students. The school\'s software can also be used at home without
additional outlay for parents. That was another of our concerns,\" notes
Céline Caron, the school\'s director. \"Countries like Brazil are more
advanced than us in terms of the number of computers per student,
precisely because they have been using free software extensively for
almost ten years. \"Quebec is positioning itself to catch up,\" says the
president of Révolution Linux, not hiding the fact that he is eyeing the
cake. \"The Quebec government invests \$2.6 billion each year in its IT
infrastructure. If we were to get just 1% of that amount, that would
mean \$26 million in contracts. The industry giants will not give up
their place to us, we will have to fight. Except that we will no longer
do so with a credibility deficit,\" believes Mr. des Ligneris. This is
not the news of the century. It is even a little difficult to
understand. Like when we first heard about generic drugs. Who among us
does not know today that generic drugs are just as effective, at a
fraction of the cost of the drugs from the manufacturer who held the
patents? From now on, the IT buffet will be shared in the same way as
the pharmaceutical buffet. The news is more important than we give it
credit for.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1037

I have had very few opportunities to rejoice in our government\'s
decisions in recent years. So, when I see one that excites me, I have to
point it out. The announcement made at the Free Software Show by the
President of the Treasury Board to the effect that the public sector
will now be required to consider and evaluate free software for its IT
needs and strategies marks a turning point in government governance of
this sector. It should be applauded. This is a courageous decision
because the minister will have to combat the reluctance of the
\"machine\", a large part of which is \"Microsoft certified\" and which
will not fail to conjure up disaster scenarios for anyone who dares to
switch from proprietary solutions to free and open source solutions. She
will have to resist, however, because the stakes are enormous. Not only
for the cost of licenses now avoided, but because it will give a very
real boost to the emerging Quebec free software industry. Hats off to
you, Madame Courchesne, and hold on tight.\* Denis L\'Homme Lévis \*Text
written and transmitted from a computer equipped with GNU/Linux and from
which Windows has been erased.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1038

The policy unveiled Wednesday by the President of the Treasury Board
will not solve the problems encountered by major IT projects, believes
the Parti Québécois. The PQ would rather see the expertise of the
various departments grouped together within a single organization. This
is what Sylvain Simard, Official Opposition spokesperson for the
Treasury Board, the Public Service and Government Services, suggests,
commenting on the tabling of the Framework Policy on Governance and
Management of Information Resources. \"The government should have the
courage to group IT specialists from the various departments into a
single unit, which would then be able to manage major projects. Our
specialists find themselves isolated in their departments and without
any direction when faced with external consultants.\" He also believes
that these \"three-letter\" firms have very little competition. \"They
share the territories. I sit on the public administration commission and
I see that for each IT contract, two firms are not compliant and the
third gets the contract. On the next contract, another gets the contract
against two non-compliant firms, and so on. I don\'t see anything in the
policy that will correct this catastrophe,\" he concludes. Retired
expertise The president of the Syndicat de professionnelles et
professionnels du gouvernement du Québec (SPGQ), Gilles Dussault, is
happy to see Ms. Courchesne recognize \"that we let too many people go.
Finally! We\'ve been saying for years that the attrition policy is
killing our expertise.\" The Treasury Board will centralize IT
development, he continues. \"It\'s not a bad idea in itself, but when
planning projects, will we consider the option of carrying out these
projects internally? That\'s the key. There are many things we can do
ourselves, even more so with free software. We are very competitive and
very competent.\" passelin@lesoleil.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1039

The President of the Treasury Board acknowledges that the government has
lost its expertise in managing major IT projects in departments and
agencies. This is not an ordinary admission, and it is fortunate that
the Minister is taking steps to regain control rather than remaining at
the mercy of the private sector. The IT resources of government agencies
and departments (including health, social services and education)
represent a lot, a lot of money: \$2.6 billion in development and
equipment, or 4% of the program spending budget. A windfall for
information technology subcontractors. Increased risks of slippage for
the government because costs and deadlines can more easily escape its
control if it is not in control. Michelle Courchesne has just presented
a bill and a framework policy on the governance and management of
information resources of public bodies and Crown corporations. Its goal:
to tighten IT resource planning, authorization, monitoring and
accountability mechanisms. Duplication and overlap will be banned. A
fight against improvisation has begun. Each public body will have to
provide a three-year plan and an annual schedule for its projects. Any
cost overrun of 10% will require additional authorization from the
Treasury Board. The Minister also advocates the use of open-source
software. She hopes that the new ways of doing things will allow the
State to save \$200 million by 2013-2014. The main flaw in this bill and
this policy is that it is coming late. Quebec has a history of failures
in terms of IT projects. A cost overrun of around 23% in the
modernization of CARRA\'s IT systems alerted the Auditor General in
2008. The Quebec Health Record has been constantly postponed since 2006
and is swallowing up millions of dollars. Problems have also been noted
at the CSST. The next report from the Auditor is likely to be very
critical. Which led the PQ opposition to say that the Liberals are
anticipating the Auditor\'s report by passing a law, and the ADQ member
François Bonnardel to say that the government is acknowledging by
legislating that its management of IT projects is a fiasco. These
responses suggest that the Liberal government is the only one to have
gotten bogged down in this area. However, the PQ government failed with
GIRES. Some \$200 million was swallowed up needlessly. Finally, a
government is taking steps to regain control of its IT services and
limit its dependence on external expertise. To achieve this, however,
Quebec will have to succeed in attracting and retaining qualified
personnel within departments and agencies. An operation that will
require imagination on the part of the Treasury Board because
competition with the private sector is fierce. Rebuilding expertise will
take time, but also money. bbreton@lesoleil.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1040

Quebec intends to closely monitor its investments in information
technology. All organizations and Crown corporations are subject to a
strict approval and evaluation process for each project by the Treasury
Board, and any cost overruns of more than 10% will require new
authorization. The President of the Treasury Board, Michelle Courchesne,
tabled her new framework policy on the governance and management of
information resources yesterday, along with the accompanying Bill 133.
Departments and public agencies, the education and health networks, as
well as Crown corporations, will have to comply. The system is
structured around a hierarchy of \"information officers.\" There will be
a \"sector\" officer for each department or agency, a \"network\"
officer for health and education; and a \"chief information officer\" at
the top of the pyramid. The structure aims to give the government an
overall picture of investments in information technology, to seize any
opportunity to consolidate, pool or share resources. It also plans to
tighten the approval process for any project of \$5 million or more,
which will have to go through three authorization stages before being
implemented. Finally, each organization will have to submit a three-year
plan of its investments annually, and have the planned expenses for the
current year approved. Ms. Courchesne assures that this policy does not
constitute an admission of failure of its major IT projects. \"We are
aiming for savings of \$200 million per year in three years, on expenses
of \$2.6 billion. It still shows that we are getting good results in
this area.\" Internally The framework policy also aims to give the
government the means to ensure greater internal control of projects. But
this requires qualified specialists, and there are not many of them,
admits the minister. \"We have lost too much expertise, it\'s true, and
it will be difficult to correct because the entire sector is facing a
shortage of qualified workers. We need to call on universities and
CEGEPs to promote these professions, which were once much more
popular.\" The President of the Treasury Board also expects changes in
the relationships between government managers and external consultants.
\"We will even go quite far in terms of precision and detail,\" she
predicts. As for open source software, she specifies that organizations
will assess its justification in the preliminary phases of project
development, therefore before the actual call for tenders process. We
will therefore still see calls for tenders exclusively for Microsoft or
other solutions. \"But with the policy, when a project is authorized,
the department or organization will have to analyze open source software
in its initial business plan. This obligation will even be part of the
directives of the law,\" she specified. Finally, Ms. Courchesne also
announced a \"major shift\" for the Centre de services partagés du
Québec (CSPQ), following an evaluation report that raised criticism.
\"We need to review the way the CSPQ positions itself at the service of
organizations. It will have to develop an approach in which the client
organization will be a stakeholder in the process,\" she said. She also
intends to eliminate invoicing between the CSPQ and the ministries.
\"That is something that unnecessarily weighs down the bureaucracy\...\"
passelin@lesoleil.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1041

QUEBEC - With better monitoring of IT projects by departments and
agencies, Quebec hopes to save \$200 million by 2013-2014. A bill
presented yesterday by Treasury Board President Michelle Courchesne will
impose tighter management of these costly purchasing programs, several
of which have turned into nightmares in recent years. She refuses to
talk about \"fiascos\" - \"slip-ups\" at most - when talking about the
tens of millions needlessly swallowed up in projects by the Ministry of
Health, the CSST or the Commission administrative des régimes de
retraite (CARRA). Government spending on IT systems reaches \$2.6
billion per year. The bill creates a position of chief information
officer - currently the Secretary of the Treasury Board, Denis Jean.
Departments and agencies will have \"sector leaders\" who will report to
him. Projects over \$5 million will have to be approved in advance by
the Treasury. Officials will have to produce annual progress reports,
and any 10% overrun of budgets will require additional authorization.
All departments and agencies are affected, as well as the education and
health networks. Even regional agencies will be required to apply this
policy. Hydro-Québec and Loto-Québec will also have to adopt an
identical strategy. Ms. Courchesne is not gentle with the structure put
in place by the Charest government, the Centre de services partagés du
Québec (CSPQ), which unnecessarily complicates the process, according to
a recent report by an independent firm. The CSPQ even went so far as to
bill departments and agencies for its services. Such an approach between
agencies of the same government is heresy, according to Ms. Courchesne.
Until now, in departments and agencies, \"everyone was doing their own
thing,\" notes Ms. Courchesne. Over time, projects that seemed simple at
first turn into \"major management challenges.\" Too often, in
government, we have tried to solve a problem by creating a huge
application when it would have been better to split the projects. In
this sense, SAGIR (Business Solutions in Integrated Resource Management)
worked better than GIRES, a database project in which more than \$200
million was swallowed up unnecessarily, according to the Auditor
General. The Auditor General will arrive late next year with a very
critical report on the management of IT projects in the government. Ms.
Courchesne denied yesterday that the government had asked Renaud
Lachance to delay submitting his report - in the last 10 years, it has
only happened once that the Auditor General did not submit his report in
December. For several years, the government has increasingly used
external expertise for its IT projects, a trend that Ms. Courchesne
wants to reverse. The emphasis will be on hiring and training, she
explains. Often, civil servants did not have the expertise to contradict
the external consultants who determined the needs of the organizations.
There is a shortage of IT specialists in government, according to the
minister. \"To challenge external consultants, you need expertise,\" she
summarized. Open source software Civil servants who decide on IT
contracts, Ms. Courchesne said yesterday, will now have to take into
account proposals for \"open source software\", these open programs
whose licenses are free, unlike expensive \"proprietary\" applications
such as Windows or Office, Microsoft\'s two main products. Open source
software will have to be evaluated in terms of quality and reliability.
The acquisition costs are zero, but the consulting services on these
products are not, she recalled. Departments will be encouraged to turn
to these less expensive solutions, which are already used by many
governments around the world. Parti Québécois MNA Sylvain Simard argued
that this gesture came very late, after several \"proven fiascos\" that
could have been corrected. As for François Bonnardel, of the ADQ, he
stressed that the announced policy was an admission of failure. There
have been many slip-ups. The Quebec Health File was supposed to cost
\$562 million, but it is now at \$800 million and the results are still
far from being there. The CARRA system was supposed to cost \$75
million; it has now reached \$110 million. Hydro-Québec\'s billing
system has many failures despite a bill of \$200 million, twice as much
as expected.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1042

Quebec is tightening the rules for managing IT projects in public
bodies, an admission of failure in the eyes of the opposition parties,
who accuse the government of having spent billions of dollars in public
funds before taking action. The President of the Treasury Board,
Michelle Courchesne, tabled a framework policy on the governance of
information resources in public bodies yesterday in the National
Assembly, which also opens the door to open-source software. \"With this
policy, we believe we will be able to save \$200 million by 2013-2014,\"
the minister insisted. Quebec is proposing, among other things, a
tightening of information resource planning, better project monitoring
and an increased role for the government\'s chief information officer.
Ms. Courchesne, who wants to recruit new IT specialists in the public
service, also acknowledged that \"considerable amounts\" have been spent
on information resources in the past and that the systematic use of the
private sector for the design of IT systems may not have been a very
good thing. After having swallowed up no less than \$2.6 billion
annually in IT projects, the government is finally admitting its
mistakes, maintains the ADQ. \"The Quebec Health File, whose estimated
costs are almost double the forecasts, or the CARRA project, which was
estimated at \$75 million and has now reached \$110 million, are just a
few examples of the Liberal fiasco in terms of IT resource management,\"
ADQ MNA François Bonnardel told the Journal. Beware of the AG\'s report
For the Parti Québécois, the hasty tabling of this bill is nothing more
than a way to defuse the upcoming Auditor General\'s report, which is
likely to be extremely critical of the government\'s management. \"This
is an attempt to respond in advance to the report by Renaud Lachance,
who has been investigating government IT projects that are fiascos for
the past 12 months, a report that will necessarily be devastating,\" PQ
MNA Sylvain Simard told the Journal. The representative for the
Richelieu riding believes that the solution proposed by Quebec to
prevent huge cost overruns in IT projects risks adding a layer of
bureaucracy, instead of tackling the root of the problem.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1043

QUEBEC CITY - QUEBEC CITY \-- Quebec is tightening the rules for
managing IT projects in public bodies, an admission of failure in the
eyes of the opposition parties, who accuse the government of having
spent billions of dollars in public funds before taking action. Treasury
Board President Michelle Courchesne tabled a framework policy on the
governance of information resources in public bodies in the National
Assembly yesterday, which also opens the door to open-source software.
\"With this policy, we believe we will be able to save \$200 million by
2013-2014,\" the minister said. Quebec is proposing, among other things,
tighter planning for information resources, better project monitoring
and a greater role for the government\'s chief information officer. Ms.
Courchesne also acknowledged that \"considerable amounts\" had been
spent on information resources in the past and that the systematic use
of the private sector to design IT systems may not have been a very good
thing.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1044

The President of the Treasury Board unveiled yesterday the \"framework
policy on governance and management of information resources\" and
tabled Bill 133, which implements this policy. \"We have lost too much
expertise, we have to admit that,\" said Michelle Courchesne during a
press conference. \"Too many external contracts? Probably,\" she said,
adding that she would like to see IT development done more by government
employees. \"We will have to be much, much more, I would say, vigilant,
or, in any case, more precise in the way we award our contracts,\" she
said. \"I am very concerned about the fact that the government is losing
its expertise and know-how in every area. So, we have to rebuild it,\"
said Michelle Courchesne, who is giving herself two or three years to
implement her policy. The government spends \$2.6 billion per year, or
4% of its program spending. Half of this amount is allocated to the
education network and the health and social services network. More than
\$1 billion per year is devoted to carrying out projects and the rest
goes to maintenance and operation. The President of the Treasury Board
has set a goal of saving \$200 million per year starting in 2013-2014.
Critical report The unveiling of this policy comes at a time when the
Auditor General of Quebec has just postponed the tabling of a critical
report on the management of major IT projects until the next
parliamentary session. The list of \"fiascos,\" a term the minister did
not want to use yesterday, is long and the cost overruns are legion: in
addition to the huge aborted GIRES project, there is the suspended
project of the Commission de la santé et sécurité du travail (CSST), the
one that ended in failure of CARRA, the manager of the civil service
pension plan, and this other one of the Réseau des services intégrés
pour personnes aînées, abandoned by the Ministry of Health and Social
Services. That\'s without counting the Dossier santé Québec, which is
seriously behind schedule. The solution put forward by Michelle
Courchesne is to centralize the management of IT projects. The Treasury
Board will impose on departments and agencies a three-year plan for
expenditures allocated to \"information resources,\" annual approvals as
well as three-stage approvals for each project. Any cost overrun of 10%
or more will have to be justified to the Treasury Board. The government
is also now advocating the use of free software when it proves
advantageous. For the MNA for Richelieu and official opposition critic
for public administration, Sylvain Simard, adding \"a layer of
government structure\" will not be enough; instead, it would be
necessary to concentrate the government\'s IT expertise and improve
competition between large IT firms. \"The government admits very
explicitly that things are going very badly, that it has lost control
and that it does not have the necessary expertise,\" he believes. ADQ
critic François Bonnardel agrees. Bill 133 is \"the confession of the
Liberal fiasco\" in IT, believes the MNA for Shefford.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1045

The government is opening the door wide to free software. With the bill
tabled today by Treasury Board President Michelle Courchesne, this
software will have to be considered in calls for tenders, not only by
ministries but by all Quebec government agencies. Ms. Courchesne gave
the closing conference of the Salon du logiciellibre du Québec yesterday
at Laval University. She could not reveal the details of the bill before
it was tabled, but she took advantage of this opportunity to announce a
shift that could shake up the Quebec IT landscape. \"In any project,
there will now be an obligation to consider free software, to analyze it
based on quality, needs and costs. This shift is not only urgent,\" she
said, \"but it will also be major, because the health and education
networks, including universities, will have to comply with it.\" She
points out that information technologies represent annual expenditures
of \$2.6 billion in ministries, organizations, and education and health
networks. Quebec will have to change the way calls for tenders are made,
in order to include comparables that are suitable for both models:
proprietary and free. \"I felt that a world separates your industry from
our managers,\" she emphasizes. Free software is still a mystery to my
colleagues and me, there will be a lot of teaching to do.\" For this
reason, the President of the Treasury Board is proposing the creation of
a table, starting in January, that will bring together representatives
of free software and government managers. \"We must give ourselves the
means to take this important turn and avoid finding ourselves in a
dialogue of the deaf.\" But these contacts will also aim to reassure
decision-makers about the capacity of this young industry to meet the
needs of the State in major projects. \"In the event of a problem, our
managers want to make sure they can resolve the issue within a few
hours\' notice. We can\'t afford to wait.\" Furthermore, Ms. Courchesne
acknowledges that the Quebec government lacks expertise when it comes to
IT challenges. \"We have let a lot of them slip away over the years, and
I am concerned about rebuilding professional teams in our organizations
as quickly as possible. It is not normal that with such large
investments we do not have sufficient strength in specialized
resources.\" For Cyrille Béraud, president of the Association
professionnelle des entreprises en logiciellibres (APELL), the progress
made in just a few months is immense. \"Ms. Courchesne\'s presence alone
was an event in itself,\" he confided. Rebuilding expertise But in his
eyes, the most important thing is the desire to rebuild the
government\'s expertise in IT. \"The real break is here. It means that
we are abandoning the ideology that has predominated until now,
according to which intelligence will be provided to us by
multinationals.\" As for Daniel Pascot, director of the Department of
Organizational Information Systems at Université Laval, he believes that
\"we have just witnessed something important. The government recognizes
that without it, nothing will happen. And that goes beyond the parties,
because everyone now recognizes it. I am only disappointed that there
was no question of adopting standards on the formats of public
documents. We must ensure that they can be consulted by any software in
10, 15 years.\" passelin@lesoleil.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1046

\"The shift is urgent, but it is big,\" summarized Ms. Courchesne before
the participants of the Salon du logiciellibre at Université Laval. But
be careful, she added, \"we are not going to transform all government
licenses overnight.\" Still: the framework policy will encourage the
government apparatus to \"analyze\" the possibility of using free
software when it makes acquisitions and to evaluate the advantages and
costs. Added to this is the creation of a round table that will bring
together government officials and industry representatives starting in
2011. Ms. Courchesne also made it clear that she would personally follow
the progress of the file. She hopes to obtain significant results within
\"two or three years.\" Furthermore, Quebec will table a bill today on
\"information resources.\" Unlike software patented by computer giants
like Microsoft, open source software allows users to have better control
over the systems they use, its defenders argue. Above all, it is
generally more affordable. The President of the Treasury Board makes no
secret of it: the government has invested heavily in IT, and not always
for the best. Noting that \$2.6 billion was injected into IT resources
each year, she said she wanted to ensure that this money was well
managed. After centralizing IT in the 1980s, the government reversed
course and massively decentralized it in the late 1990s, she said,
before deploring the fact that in the process, the government "let go of
a lot of expertise." But it is wrong to believe that there is no open
source software in government, she pointed out. "It is made. \[\...\]
The Department of Public Security even won an award for open source
mapping software." On the other hand, there is great resistance and
managers will need to be \"reassured,\" she said in a warning tone.
\"Will those who have come to integrate them be able to provide a kind
of after-sales service if needed?\" A few minutes earlier, the dean of
the Faculty of Administration, Robert W. Mantha, had compared the
arrival of free software to Gutenberg\'s invention of the printing
press. But Gutenberg, he said, had the advantage of operating in a kind
of technological desert while free software is up against the interests
of well-established software companies. This is definitely the year of
great successes for this industry, which has won a political victory
after winning in court against the Régie des rentes, which had excluded
it from a call for tenders in favor of Microsoft. For Professor Daniel
Pascot, who has been campaigning for the cause for years, \"the
government understood that if it did nothing, nothing was going to
happen.\" Satisfied in particular with the idea of a round table, Mr.
Pascot was nevertheless \"a little disappointed\" yesterday that Ms.
Courchesne did not talk about \"formats.\" \"A big obstacle, at the
moment, is that Microsoft has control over the format of documents,\" he
said. According to him, the government should favor \"free and public\"
formats, such as \".odt\" as opposed to those that are protected by
patents, such as \".doc.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1047

Well known as a computer hardware recovery company, the Centre de
traitement d\'ordinateurs usagés (CTOU) has just added a new component
to its services with the creation of the CTOU international foundation,
or FICTOU, whose objective is to provide computer equipment to community
organizations, at home or abroad, after giving a second life to
computers that are supposedly at the end of their life. Jean-Pierre
Tremblay, vice-president of business development and community support,
specifies that FICTOU wants not only to promote good recycling
practices, but also to support non-profit organizations in
computerization projects and technical development, and also to promote
open source software. \"When a company sends its old computers, it is
making an ecological gesture,\" says Mr. Tremblay, \"but with FICTOU, we
can offer to go further with computers that can still be used. If the
company does not know of any organizations to which we could provide the
computers, we can suggest names. With the company\'s agreement, we will
do the work.\" At the same time, CTOU gives the work of dismantling
parts to people who have difficulty finding a job because of functional
limitations or who have intellectual disabilities. Thus, in addition to
the recovery of computer equipment, the ecological component, we add the
social component for work in community projects, and the humanitarian
component with functional computers for non-profit organizations. school
partnership \"By taking action in favor of the environment, by
developing the social side with workers with limitations, we also ensure
the financial sustainability of the organizations in the process,
everyone finding their account, adds Mr. Tremblay. This is what gives us
the sustainable and equitable equation.\" In this vein, FICTOU is
negotiating a partnership agreement with the Les Compagnons-de-Cartier
school with three work platforms. The first on recycling techniques, the
second on the dismantling and testing of devices and the third on the
reconstruction of functional computers. The school\'s assistant
director, Natalie Blais, confirms that the partnership agreement should
be signed in the coming days. \"The assembly-disassembly workshop would
involve students in the pre-employment training program,\" she
emphasizes. \"And in addition to manual work, some students will be
involved in the administrative side of customer relations because people
will bring their old computers here. It\'s a great opportunity to put
young people at the heart of the action.\" The school would become a
drop-off point for CTOU so that the entire project would be
environmentally friendly. In addition, for regular classes, CTOU would
participate in the \"discovery\" program in science with workshops on
robotics. International Other agreements are about to be finalized with
international cooperation organizations in Quebec such as AMIE (Aide
internationale à l\'enfance), Plan Nagua and CSI (Coopération santé
internationale). \"First, he says, we check the technical and
operational aspects. Which organization on site can take charge of the
computer equipment? Are there trained people? If not, we can train
someone from the community here to become responsible for local
technical support.\" Secondly, Mr. Tremblay says that the energy aspect
must be analyzed before installing the computers. If the orphanage,
cooperative or dispensary does not have an electrical connection, solar
power will have to be considered. And, lastly, to close the loop, FICTOU
wants to ensure that once they have reached the end of their life, the
computers can be recovered and recycled according to standards. \"If
there is no recycling network in the region, there will always have to
be a channel to do it,\" assures Mr. Tremblay, in order to respect the
principles followed by CTOU. ytherrien@lesoleil.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1048

The first thing you notice about Richard Stallman is his appearance, his
beard and messy hair. But when you listen to him, it\'s the power of his
ideas that strikes you. The \"father\" of free software founded a
movement to protect our essential rights, our computer \"sovereignty\".
The computer scientist is a guest speaker at the Salon du logiciellibre
du Québec, which ends today. Without Richard Stallman, the system we
call Linux would never have existed. \"I wasn\'t an activist at the time
\[in 1984\], I was a programmer, but I was aware of an injustice.
Without a \"free\" operating system, users would always be prisoners of
big companies.\" Richard Stallman therefore used his programming talents
to create the GNU system, to which the Linux \"kernel\" was added in
1993. All Linux systems in this world are in reality GNU/Linux systems.
It was a tour de force in computing, but the real challenge taken up by
Stallman was to have created an ethics of computing, based on four
\"essential freedoms\": being able to do whatever you want with a
program; being able to distribute copies to others; being able to study
and change it; and finally being able to distribute copies of these
modifications. Creating a dependency It is in the name of these values
that he affirms that \"governments must take the turn towards free
software, to keep control over their data. They have the responsibility
to maintain this control and never give it up to a company. It is a
matter of the computer sovereignty of the State.\" And it is important
to do this from school, according to him. \"Some \"private\" companies
give free copies of their software to schools, but it is to create a
future dependency on their products. It is as if we allowed schools to
distribute drugs for free\... Schools must create free, united
citizens.\" Also, the use of free software allows students who wish to
study how it works. \"Budding programmers can get the source code to
learn how it works, which is impossible with proprietary software\...\"
Several countries, including Canada, want to set up an
Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement (ACTA). But according to him, one of
the consequences of this agreement will be to prohibit the use of free
software to view multimedia content on DVD. passelin@lesoleil.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1049

Richard Stallman, an American computer scientist who founded the
FreeSoftwareFoundation (FSF), will be the guest of honor at the Salon du
logiciellibre, which will take place tomorrow and Tuesday at Université
Laval. Mr. Stallman is the founder of the GNU project, the operating
system that is wrongly called \"Linux.\" The term Linux refers to the
kernel, one of the components of the operating system. For this reason,
the FSF would prefer that we talk about the GNU/Linux system. Since the
mid-90s, Richard Stallman has devoted most of his time to promoting free
software to various audiences around the world. During the two days of
meetings, 45 speakers will share their expertise with participants. On
Tuesday morning, Mr. Stallman will meet at the National Assembly with a
delegation from the Parti Québécois led by Marie Malavoy, MNA for
Taillon and Official Opposition Critic for Higher Education and
Research. In addition, on Tuesday afternoon, the Show will bring
together representatives from Quebec political parties for a round table
to discuss the use of virtual tools to enhance relationships between
citizens and public administration. The event will be an excellent
opportunity to measure the progress of free software in government
agencies around the world, during a conference given tomorrow afternoon
by a South African expert, Nico Elema. The Show is organized by the
Professional Association of Free Software Companies, which encourages
the creation and development of this movement.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1050

Nearly 700 participants are expected next week for the Salon du
logiciellibre du Québec, where Treasury Board President Michelle
Courchesne is expected to unveil the broad outlines of her framework
policy on information resources to the government. The free software
industry is pinning a lot of hope on the bill that Ms. Courchesne is
expected to table before the end of the month. She has already indicated
that a section of the policy will address this issue. The government
would be prepared to adopt measures to open the tendering process to
these companies. The government could also have a profound effect on
Quebec\'s digital culture without increasing its spending, believes
Daniel Pascot, director of the organizational information systems
department at Université Laval and also president of FACIL, an
association that promotes free computing. \"The government should commit
to using open formats as a priority,\" he says. \"This is a completely
realistic position that will lead to good use, because if the government
uses these formats, it will lead the population and businesses to do the
same.\" These formats include, for example, .txt, PDF, JPEG, all
OpenOffice formats, or .ogg for audio files, which are accessible to all
users. So-called \"proprietary\" formats, such as .doc, .xls or .ppt
from Microsoft are covered by patents that can limit their use.
According to Mr. Pascot, Quebec could, for example, commit to accepting
all documents in open formats, and could even go so far as to refuse to
finance migrations to new software using proprietary formats. Better
ensured sustainability \"The government is not a business like any
other, it must ensure the sustainability of information, and open
formats offer the best guarantee in this regard.\" Opening up to
software that can be used, modified, reproduced and distributed without
restriction risks causing conflicts with users and sellers of patented
software, whether from Microsoft, Adobe, Apple, etc. For example, the
Centre des services partagés du Québec (CSPQ) unveiled its new
\"standards\" in a recent call for tenders on the migration of
workstations and technological infrastructures from the CSPQ, the
Ministère des Services Gouvernementales and Services Québec. Some 4,000
workstations and 360 servers will be exclusively reserved for Microsoft
solutions, a few weeks before the President of the Treasury Board
presents her policy. At the same time, the Microsoft Select registration
contract and the software assurance program, which cover purchases of
Microsoft products and services by Quebec ministries and organizations,
expired on September 30 and have still not been renewed. It is the
software resellers, from the firm Compugen, who are responsible for
informing the various ministries of the status of the discussions. \"The
CSPQ\'s Acquisitions Branch has been working for several weeks on
implementing a new software CT \[Treasury Board\] and we will inform you
as soon as it is in effect,\" wrote Nadine Carufel, director of software
solutions marketing for Compugen, in an email sent to government
clients, dated October 28. Are these negotiations related to the
framework policy that Ms. Courchesne is to announce? We will know next
week. But in a more recent message, dated November 24, Compugen informed
its clients that negotiations are still underway for the renewal of
software assurances, which allow for the acquisition of recent versions.
\"We suggest that you remain patient and we will inform you as soon as
possible,\" they wrote. passelin@lesoleil.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1051

They talk about politics as well as childbirth, the environment as well
as education. Different but united, Quebec bloggers now have their day.
Tomorrow, more than a hundred of them will meet in Montreal for the
first \"Belles à bloguer\" conference. The idea was raised by a blogger
last spring, then made its way onto social media. When Mélanie Thivierge
heard about the initiative, the blog reader in her was thrilled. That
was all it took for Coup de pouce, which she runs, to get on board with
the organization. In Quebec, those interested in the web and blogs
already have a few conferences they can attend. What sets bloggers apart
from their peers? \"There are values that are specific to girls\'
blogs,\" explains Mélanie Thivierge. \"Girls are more likely to express
who they are, how they feel. They open up a lot.\" A sentiment shared by
Sandra Bellefoy, who has been blogging for eight years under the
pseudonym \"Etolane.\" She believes that men are more likely to blog
about their work or a specific interest. \"If she\'s a mother, we\'ll
find the \"child\" aspect in a woman\'s blog. If she\'s not, she\'ll
often talk about fashion. In their blogs, women tend to present several
aspects of their lives.\" Sandra \"Etolane\" Bellefoy\'s blog is a good
example. \"At first, I talked about linguistics, arts and culture. Then
I became a mother and it became a mommy blog. Now that I\'ve started
working again, it\'s a blog about everything!\" A meeting of experts
It\'s not because they sometimes discuss breastfeeding, shopping and
hair that the bloggers\' day will be all pink. Conferences on blog
marketing, the history of the women\'s blogosphere and SEO on the
Internet are also on the menu. \"It\'s still a meeting of expert
Internet users, not a meeting of people who have never touched a
keyboard,\" says Sandra Bellefoy. The event coordinator believes that
it\'s the predominantly female audience that will bring the special
color to \"Belles à bloguer.\" \"The workshop topics are topics that
interest everyone who blogs. I think the female bias will be reflected
in the audience,\" says Mélanie Thivierge. Girls who will sometimes meet
for the first time outside of virtual limits. \"There is something in
the female blogosphere that I don\'t see elsewhere,\" says Mélanie
Thivierge. \"There are values of mutual aid, sharing, support. The
bloggers will encourage each other, pass on tips, advice. The girls know
each other without ever having met.\" After tomorrow, that will be a
thing of the past. Info: www.facebook.com/Bellesabloguer

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1052

The reprimand stemmed from a call for tenders issued a few years earlier
by the Régie des rentes du Québec (RRQ) for the replacement of office
suites. Only products from the multinational Microsoft were considered,
raising the ire of free software advocates, who took the case to court.
With this victory in hand, they are now calling on the government to
adopt a policy aimed at facilitating the emergence of free software in
public administration, \"for greater savings, greater data security,\"
but also so that digital Quebec can inscribe its \"development in a
sustainable logic\" for the future, says Daniel Pascot, director of the
information systems department at Université Laval and president of the
Association pour l\'appropriation collective de l\'informatique libre
(FACIL). \"We are at a pivotal moment in the computerization of public
services. In the wake of the judgment, there is a stronger awareness of
the advantages of free software. But there are still many barriers,
prejudices and reluctance to break down to allow it to circulate more
freely.\" Strong barriers The issue of computerizing the RRQ and its
legal consequences have shaken the administration, but the barriers have
not given way, as evidenced by a call for tenders launched in early
November by the Centre des services partagés du Québec and which, once
again, mainly favoured proprietary software. \"We are still struggling
with many blockages induced by the government and the administration,\"
he says. \"A profound paradigm shift is therefore necessary, as is
sending a clear signal from elected officials for the establishment of a
new IT ecosystem.\" The issue, which should find some resonance at the
Salon du logiciellibre opening in Quebec City early next week, is
significant. Indeed, by asserting its supremacy in recent years,
commercial software, that owned by multinationals such as Microsoft, has
also profoundly shaped the minds of decision-makers, the operating
methods of the government apparatus as well as the citizens who interact
with it. \"We don\'t worry about it enough, but computer codes guide our
behavior,\" says Mr. Pascot, quoting the famous American lawyer Lawrence
Lessig, a specialist in computer law and author of Code and Other Laws
of Cyberspace. The consequence, however, is now perceptible at all
levels within the State where, from now on, free software to ensure the
activities of civil servants is mainly seen as a series of constraints,
claim the defenders of this type of application: \"The costs of change
are significant,\" says Mr. Pascot, \"because commercial software is
very well established. The formats of the documents are not open and, as
a result, can only be consulted with licensed software.\" A captivity
that is profitable for the software manufacturer and costly for the
public administration, which could nevertheless see the current context
of budgetary restrictions as a good opportunity to get out of it, he
believes. \"The cuts are good for free software,\" he says, \"since they
could encourage government departments and agencies to unite to develop
common IT solutions based on free software. But, to do that, we have to
start thinking long-term, which is not always easy in the government
apparatus.\" A clear message The process is already underway in the
municipal world, says Mr. Pascot, where several cities are more easily
adhering to computer freedom. \"Right now, for example, the City of
Quebec is using software that was developed for the City of Laval,\" he
says. \"Of course, it\'s more economical. And it\'s also a step in the
right direction.\" The tone is set. And to spread elsewhere in society,
it is now a clear message from the government that digital Quebec would
need, according to him. \"We need to promote the free format \[as
opposed to commercial formats from software like Word, Excel,
PowerPoint, etc.\], but also encourage sharing in software development
by questioning the budgetary divisions by department in the public
administration.\" For Mr. Pascot, this new situation would certainly
have a positive impact on computer security \-- \"when you know the
computer code of a software, it is easier to defend it\" \--, but also
on the sustainability of government computer data which would then no
longer be dependent on applications in the hands of private interests.
\"Free software is a common good that not only has interesting technical
benefits,\" he continues. \"It is also an element favorable to
sustainable development that stimulates the local economy.\" As proof,
he cites the millions of dollars in licenses that end up each year in
countries with lenient taxation, where software giants have opened
offices. \"For Quebec, which pays large sums for these licenses, the
results are negative,\" he says. And if we decide to stop paying for
them by turning to free software, it will definitely pay off\" by
contributing to the development of local expertise that all of Quebec
can then benefit from, before making the rest of the planet benefit from
it, believes Mr. Pascot. He adds: \"The choice of a document and
software format is ultimately a political act,\" which politicians
should now seek to better understand, according to him.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1053

Paris - Several websites and blogs have made La carte et le territoire
by French writer Michel Houellebecq, winner of the Prix Goncourt, freely
available on the Internet, practices against which Flammarion publishers
have announced \"taking legal action\". These actions target websites
that offer the 2010 Goncourt for illegal downloading and the blogger
specializing in free software, Florian Gallaire, who is distributing it
for free in PDF format. For Gallaire, the fact that the writer was
heavily inspired by three articles published on the encyclopedic
platform Wikipedia \"makes the novel a free work\". He explains that the
Creative Commons BY-SA license, under which Wikipedia is placed,
requires that the author of the article be cited and that the \"share
alike\" clause be respected: \"If you modify, transform or adapt this
creation - the article - , you only have the right to distribute the
resulting creation under a contract identical to this one.\" \"We are
going to take legal action against the interested parties, starting with
a formal notice. And if that is not enough, we will take action,\"
replied the director of Flammarion publishing house, Gilles Haéri, to
AFP. \"This is all the more damaging because we are going to make
available for legal download, starting next week, the entire work of
Michel Houellebecq, i.e. 13 books\" (novels, poetry and essays),
announced the general director. Their price will be 20% lower than that
of the paper version.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1054

According to her, the call, by favouring only commercial applications
such as those from Microsoft, would contravene a Superior Court ruling
that, since last July, has forced the government to take so-called free
software into account in its IT procurement. Accusations rejected out of
hand by the CSPQ, which, in this case, says it acted in accordance with
the law. \"This is not a call for tenders for software licenses,\"
Patricia Marton, spokesperson for the government agency, told Le Devoir
yesterday, \"but rather a call for professional services aimed at
consolidating and simplifying computer networks.\" However, for APELL,
it is rather a roundabout way of excluding free software from the public
IT landscape, even though Judge Denis Jacques strongly condemned this
practice a few months ago. The case involved the company Savoir-Faire
Linux, accusing the Régie des rentes du Québec (RRQ) of favouring
Microsoft products in a call for tenders, to the disregard of free
software that could have offered a financially interesting alternative
solution. The court ruled in favor of the entrepreneur while ordering
Quebec to no longer issue such calls for tenders. However, the
reorganization of the computer network by the CSPQ does not comply with
this directive, states APELL, since it will be done \"around a single
technological platform based on proprietary software,\" the association
indicates in a press release. It denounces in passing \"the control of
Quebec\'s information systems by a small group of multinationals,
without comparison and without competition.\" While recalling that, in
this case, free software could have been considered, APELL is demanding
that Quebec adopt a \"real policy for the use of free software within
Quebec administrations.\" Let us recall that last September, the Société
de transport de Montréal (STM) suspended a call for tenders that failed
to make room for free software. At the time, the Association pour
l\'appropriation collective de l\'informatique libre (FACIL) had
denounced this situation, forcing the company to rethink its digital
needs. Between recognition and reluctance, free software is increasingly
seeking its place in government systems, here and elsewhere. For its
promoters, this type of application allows for increased flexibility and
improves the security and sustainability of computer data while easing
the pressure on public finances. In a context of budgetary crisis,
several administrations, including that of Barack Obama, have spoken out
in favour of this software in recent years. The Parti Québécois has also
encouraged the Charest government to do the same.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1055

Yes, today, we can do almost everything with a gadget that fits in our
pocket. The most interesting thing in this situation is not the state of
affairs (even if we could dwell on the profound difference between being
able to do almost everything and wanting to do almost everything), but
the technological battle that underlies this evolution. We are not
talking here about the innovation front (oh, soon 3D, and then very high
speed, and then coffee, too, one day), but about the economic and
especially political confrontation that is raging in the mobile Internet
sector. Because behind the market of these small applications that are
multiplying and redecorating a phone screen like a Christmas tree, a
potentially problematic movement is beginning. Indeed, the Internet has
grown as a common good. Based mainly on free software and governed by
rules such as network neutrality - which ensures that the smallest high
school blog can benefit from the network infrastructures on an equal
footing with Microsoft or BNP. If it had been necessary to develop as
many applications as there are operating systems (iOS, Android, Windows,
Blackberry, etc.), to pass the filter of manufacturers who arrogate to
themselves the right to accept or refuse new features, or to avoid
developing technologies that are too innovative for fear of entering
into competition with the paid services of operators, all the biggest
players today, from Google to Facebook via Skype, Amazon or Twitter
would not be there. The smartphone market is a new El Dorado, yes. But
manufacturers are perhaps too greedy. By wanting to restrict openness to
ensure economic control over technological development, they run the
risk of slowing it down considerably. But in the best case scenario, the
real losers will not necessarily be Internet users. Such a controlled,
closed ecosystem, economically very profitable but which ends up being
left behind by the inventiveness and dynamism that prevails in open
environments, in France, we have already experienced that well. It was
called Minitel.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1056

Despite a Superior Court ruling that opened the door to free software,
the Centre des services partagés du Québec (CSPQ) has just adopted
standards that practically grant exclusivity to Microsoft solutions. The
CSPQ\'s most recent call for tenders establishes standards for the
\"migration of workstations and technological infrastructures of the
CSPQ, the Ministère des Services Gouvernements and Services Québec\". A
decision that affects 4,000 workstations and approximately 360 servers,
used by employees of the CSPQ, the Ministère des Services Gouvernements
and Services Québec. It is because the Centre des services partagés
brings together employees from several organizations that use different
technological infrastructures that the organization has decided to
standardize office tools. In a 180-page document, the CSPQ mentions
\"the unification and rationalization of the software catalogue\". For
messaging services, this means \"migrating to a Microsoft Exchange 2010
infrastructure\". And for workstations, the \"reinstallation of
workstations and laptops from Windows XP (SP3)\" as well as the
\"standardization of the office suite to Office 2007\". We also want to
stick to Microsoft System Center Configuration Manager 2007, a solution
that would eventually lead users to migrate to the Windows 7 operating
system. A subterfuge In a press release, the Professional Association of
Free Software Companies (APELL) denounces the operation as a subterfuge
aimed essentially at circumventing the judgment that imposed the opening
of public markets to free software solutions. \"APELL questions the
legality of this call for tenders, since it awards, de facto, a market
to multinationals of proprietary software, without putting it into
competition, without comparison with free software solutions\", writes
Roger Laberge, delegate to the public sector of the association. The
latter is asking the President of the Treasury Board, Michelle
Courchesne, \"to cancel the call for tenders and to implement a real
policy for the use of free software within Quebec administrations.\" The
case is reminiscent of that of the Société de transport de Montréal,
which decided in September to suspend a call for tenders for the
acquisition of 2,577 Microsoft Office 2010 licenses for the same
reasons. According to Daniel Pascot, director of the organizational
information systems department at Université Laval and a specialist in
free software, the CSPQ \"is locking in choices for the future. At first
glance, it looks very much like a strategy to circumvent the judgment.\"
At the beginning of the summer, Superior Court Judge Denis Jacques
concluded that it was not possible to limit oneself to a single supplier
without \"serious and documented research\" into other available
solutions. \"On what criteria, on what study did the CSPQ base itself to
adopt these standards? asks Daniel Pascot. We would like to know.\"
passelin@lesoleil.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1057

The Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), which defends the
interests of the record industry in the United States, had obtained, at
the end of October, the deactivation of the peer-to-peer sharing
software Limewire. Useless enterprise: Limewire being a free software,
it can be cloned at will and completely legally. Since the ban, its
official version can no longer be downloaded on Limewire.com. But
developers have gone to dig into the source code of the abandoned
software to revive it from its ashes. And better: the Pirate Edition,
that\'s its name, will work better and longer than its official big
sister, promise the new developers. Who are not looking for any form of
remuneration: \"no advertising or spies\" In the software, \"pirate
coders do this for the good of the community\". Despite an unambiguous
name and a downright insolent description on the software\'s Pirate Bay
page (\"Middle finger at the RIAA\", which we dare not translate here),
the Pirate Edition makes the effort to warn users about the possible
illegality of the downloads they are making.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1058

IT This is the biggest fundraising of French start-ups. Talend, the
publisher of database solutions, has raised \$34 million from the
American fund Silver Lake and its current shareholders, Balderton and
Idinvest (formerly AGF Private Equity). In just three years of
existence, Talend has raised a total of \$62 million. The growth
potential of this company founded by Bertrand Diard and Fabrice Bonan
was spotted by Bernard Liautaud, one of the few French people to have
founded a global software publisher with Business Objects (BO). After
the resale of Business Objects to the German SAP, Bernard Liautaud
joined the Balderton fund and invested in Talend, which he has been very
actively advising since then. Talend publishes open source software that
aggregates company data and connects it to applications: sales, payroll,
commercial, customer relations, etc. It currently has 2,000 customers
worldwide, including Citibank, Yahoo! eBay, Verizon, France Telecom or
CDiscount. The company should achieve a turnover of around 30 to 35
million euros this year and is aiming for nearly 70 million in 2011. The
company is not yet balanced. Acquisition in Germany Thanks to the money
raised from its investors, Talend will be able to make acquisitions. The
first of these has just been signed. It is Sopera, a German company that
allows business applications to communicate with each other. The
products developed by Sopera are very complementary to those of Talend.
Above all, this acquisition opens the doors to the German market for the
French group. This acquisition should be followed by others because
Talend must take the turn towards cloud computing, which allows
businesses to relocate some of their IT services to the Internet.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1059

If, like me, you have a series of old photos that you would like to keep
on your computer or share on a social network, you need a scanner. On
the market, there are large format devices, those capable of scanning
negatives and slides or those integrated into multifunction printers. In
general, these are large devices that take up a lot of space on a work
table or desk at home. But, I have just tested a small model that is
very interesting for photos not exceeding the format 10 cm x 15 cm (4 in
x 6 in). And it is fast. On Mac or Windows PC, no need to install a
driver or special software with the new Optex Printscan1 scanner. It is
automatically recognized on OS 10.6 on Mac and by Windows Vista and
Windows 7 on PC. There is software with the device, but it is useless if
you already have image processing software such as Photoshop Elements,
for example. The device can operate in standalone mode with a USB key or
an SD or SDHC memory card as a storage element. It is then connected to
upload digital images to the computer. It can also be kept connected to
the computer. But on the Mac, the only inconvenience during scanning,
the systematic disconnection when storing the image produces an error
message advising that the module has been disconnected incorrectly. On
PCs, this does not happen. Very small, the device is 24 cm x 6 cm x 18
cm. You have to take the time to calibrate the sensor and clean it from
time to time with the tools provided, especially when the scanned image
seems to have retained dust. The device is fast, but you have to make
sure to handle the photos carefully to put the image straight in the
feed slot. The resolution is 300 dpi. An interesting device, but limited
in terms of the format of the photos to be scanned. It is distributed by
Gentec International (www.gentec-intl.com/fr) and sells for around
\$150. Sansa Fuze Multimedia Player SanDisk, a company known for its
flash memory cards, recently launched a new multimedia player and MP3
player. Being more accustomed to touch screens, I had difficulty with
the touchpad of the Sansa Fuse device in the first few minutes. Once you
get used to it, it becomes relatively easy to navigate the menus to go
from one music album to another or from the photo section to the video
section, even to the radio, because the player is also an FM receiver.
Interesting, because you can even record a program in progress when you
can\'t download the podcast. While consulting the tree structure works
well when the device is connected to a PC, you have to take a few
detours on a Mac. The device is not recognized as a flash drive the
first time. I had to use the small open source software XNJB to mount
the drive on the Mac desktop and transfer music albums and photos
manually. The device is not compatible with iTunes, but PC software is
available on a mini CD in the box. There is a slot for a microSHDC
memory card that expands the storage capacity or allows the use of
slotRadio cards that contain songs in different genres. Most slotRadio
cards hold 1000 songs and sell for about \$40. The player\'s battery is
said to last 24 hours of audio playback and five hours of video.
Overall, the player is a good value for its price and the versatility of
its options. However, accessing the different sections is not as easy as
the documentation claims. The sale price varies between \$90 and \$130
depending on the 4, 8 or 16 GB versions. Shaun White Skateboarding Shaun
White is in prison because he had fun. The Ministry, a kind of political
entity of the pleasure cutter, prefers the gray world, without color.
However, skateboard enthusiasts are imprisoned physically and in their
minds. It is up to an anonymous enthusiast, in this case the player, to
give color back to the world in this totally gray universe. No real
competition, but an adventure where you have to, by practicing many
tricks, reanimate objects and people. The force of transformation will
be calculated according to the points accumulated. The more complex the
figure, the higher the number of points and the more effective the
effect on the environment. And the player gains in skill and ability to
influence with the level of flow. There are some not very realistic
little passes with the grind bars that deploy in the air to go from one
point to another in special areas. Not to mention the special objects to
collect by performing acrobatics. The game is particularly easy and
forgives a lot of the player\'s mistakes with his controller. No
competition, but a lot of repetition of movements to perform tricks.
It\'s on the edge of casual play. Skateboarding fans may find it
interesting. Competition freaks will be disappointed. And Shaun White,
we hardly see him. For PS3, Xbox 360 and Wii consoles. Sells for \$60.
Portable Santa Claus He\'s back, Santa Claus, with his customizable
video greetings on www.perenoelportable.tv. The famous PNP console
(Portable Santa Claus) has already received 23 million visits and led to
the broadcast of 10 million messages. The PNP will be online starting
November 22 with applications for iPhone, iPod and iPad, new forms of
messages and a newspaper of news from the world of elves in addition to
advice for children. It\'s a fun little gadget.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1060

In The Social Network, two heroes share the spotlight, Mark Zuckerberg,
creator of Facebook, and his eminence grise, the scheming Sean Parker. A
brilliant hacker, Parker is the co-founder of Napster, a peer-to-peer
music file sharing service, whose dazzling success rocked the music
industry between 1999 and 2001, when it was closed by court order. A few
years later, Parker joined forces with Zuckerberg and became a
billionaire. In the background, we can read another story, that of the
Internet and its distortion, from Napster to Facebook, from peer-to-peer
to Web 2.0, from a decentralized file sharing system to a monolithic
proprietary platform, certainly more attractive, but monopolizing
Internet users\' content, controlling their interactions and exploiting
and monetizing their personal data. At least, this is the analysis made
by supporters of the open Web. On the fringes, open source initiatives
that want to return to the foundations of the Internet are
proliferating. The most popular initiative, Diaspora, created by four
New York students, aims to be an alternative Facebook, based on the use
of the peer-to-peer protocol, and which allows users to keep control of
their data. In a similar vein, there are also The Appleseed Project,
Crabgrass or NoseRub. Alternatives to Twitter have also appeared, such
as Identi.ca or soon Thimbl, in the running for the new Open Web prize
launched by the Berlin festival Transmediale in collaboration with
Mozilla. Thimbl, from the Telekommunisten collective, is one of the
three finalists alongside Graffiti Analysis and Booki, a free service
for creating books, which Internet users are invited to decide between.
\"What has been lost sight of in the hype of the so-called \"social
Web\", writes Dmitry Kleiner, co-founder of the Berlin cooperative, is
that sharing is the reason for the Internet. Usenet, Email, IRC, all
these decentralized platforms that were not owned by anyone, have
enabled social connections, the emergence of citizen journalism, the
sharing of photos \[\...\]. And microblogging itself would have been
possible decades ago.\" In fact, Thimbl, still in development, is based
on classic Internet technologies, such as the Finger protocol created in
the 70s, a service present virtually on every server, but generally
disabled. It does not require a specific application. Thimbl is thus
built on Internet standards (Finger, SHH, http\...), which should make
it a very widely accessible distributed social network. No need to
reinvent the wheel each time, believes Kleiner, it is enough to enhance
what already exists. This free microblogging service is just one of the
projects of this political collective of \"agitating workers\" operating
in the telecommunications sphere. Among their assets are Dialstation, a
low-cost long-distance communications service, Trick, cheap
micro-hosting, Deadswap, an offline file-sharing system, where
participants pass around a USB key under the table. For Dmitry Kleiner,
\"the biggest challenge of the open Web is not technical, it is
political.\" In The Telekommunist Manifesto, which has just been
published, the hacker born in the Soviet Union opposes \"peer-to-peer
communism to the centralized Client-Server capitalist state.\" He lays
the foundations for an alternative economic organization that propels
Marx and Engels\' Communist Manifesto into the Internet age.
Www.thimbl.net www.telekommunisten.net www.networkcultures.org/
networknotebooks

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1061

Jérôme Kerviel, Albert Gonzalez, Julian Assange\... The three men do not
know each other, live in different countries and have nothing in common,
a priori. Except for one thing: each in his own way has destabilized a
financial or political institution with a violence never before
recorded. The first, 33, a former trader at Société Générale, took risky
positions on 50 billion euros of financial assets by thwarting the
bank\'s internal controls. These positions generated losses of almost 5
billion euros. Without a capital increase, Générale was sinking body and
soul. The second, Albert Gonzalez, 28, was indicted in the United States
in 2009 for hacking and reselling the details of more than 130 million
bank cards from the Heartland financial group, the largest theft ever
committed in the United States. The third, Julian Assange, 39, became
famous this year for posting 77,000 top secret documents on the war in
Afghanistan on the WikiLeaks website. He did it again with a second
batch of documents on October 22, this time on Iraq. The Pentagon was
turned upside down. These three examples mark the emergence at the
beginning of the 21st century of a new kind of Superman. For the first
time in the history of humanity, a simple individual, devoid of the
traditional tools of power (army, police, etc.), without any particular
charisma, can cause global disorder or destabilize institutions. Of
course, it has happened in history that individuals have articulated the
course of events around themselves. Joan of Arc, Rasputin or Gandhi,
doubtless gifted with exceptional charisma, were able to act on the will
of the powerful or the masses. But, with the Kerviels or the Gonzalezes,
here comes the advent of Super-banal-men. A Superman without qualities.
The Americans invented a word to designate these new individuals:
\"super-empowerment\". Simple empowerment designated the capacity of an
individual to mobilize the external and internal resources necessary for
his life balance and the realization of his projects. Super-empowerment
marks the capacity of an individual - or a group - to use or divert
technological tools that did not exist ten years ago to satisfy an
individual appetite for power or to battle with powers that he would not
have dreamed of scratching a decade before. The emergence of these new
powers depends on several conditions. The first is the provision of
sophisticated but easy-to-use tools to the general public. The software
used by Gonzalez to hack Heartland is freely downloadable on the
Internet. The second condition is the Internet: social networks and
blogs multiply the channels for circulating information and allow people
who do not know each other to form powerful ad hoc alliances. Julien
Assange, figurehead of WikiLeaks, invites the whole world to denounce
\"unethical\" institutional behavior, but who knows what personal
score-settling is hidden behind each leak? To trigger a political
tsunami, sometimes all it takes is to speak out at the right time.
American pastor Terry Jones, only known to his neighbors before
September 11, angered the population of 22 Muslim countries by
threatening to burn the Koran to commemorate September 11, 2001. Third
condition: electronic technologies often allow dual use, civil or
military. A mobile phone can trigger a deadly explosion remotely.
American guerrilla specialist John Robb explained on his blog Global
Guerilla how SkyGrabber, a software of Russian origin, sold for \$25.95,
allowed Afghan and Iraqi insurgents to hack the video feeds of American
military drones that are trying to spy on or exterminate them. A fourth
reason underlies the emergence of Superman: the excessive complexity of
developed societies. Skyscrapers, power plants, sewage treatment plants,
pipelines, attacked or damaged by a few determined men, can paralyze a
city or even a region for a long time. And institutions are too slow and
too bureaucratic to anticipate where the next blow will come from.
Especially since the worst is yet to come. A number of cheap,
easy-to-use techniques, perfectible because they are developed in open
source, are just waiting for a little creativity to be diverted for
destabilizing purposes. The progressive democratization of
biotechnologies makes the mass production of pathogenic tools capable of
decimating a country, or even a continent, accessible to anyone. The
first drones for individual use are already on the market. Who knows
what espionage or destruction missions programmed by malicious
individuals these miniature flying machines will be able to accomplish?
Twenty years ago, national security was threatened only by the USSR.
Now, the enemy may live next door, or in the apartment above.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1062

This week, MP Charlie Angus tabled a motion to this effect in the House
of Commons. The symbolic gesture underscores the importance for Ottawa
of supporting open-source information and communications technologies,
but also of supporting companies promoting applications not governed by
user licenses. The technological path advocated by the NDP is part of a
global trend. Several governments, including those of the United States
and France, have committed to using more so-called free software in
their administration.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1063

Treasury Board President Michelle Courchesne plans to make room for free
software in the policy she is soon to table on governance and
information resources. Ideas are already starting to circulate outside
the government on ways to structure the development of this model. Last
week, two Parti Québécois members unveiled a file that discussed the
savings that the use of free software could bring to the provincial
government. According to Marie Malavoy and Sylvain Simard, the Quebec
government must adopt a policy on the use of free software and open
formats. On Thursday, Ms. Courchesne\'s press secretary, Isabelle
Mercille, stated that \"the minister is sensitive to the evolution of
this industry. A section will be dedicated specifically to free software
in the framework policy on governance and information resources that Ms.
Courchesne is due to table in the fall.\" The minister has also been
invited to participate in the next Salon du logiciellibre, which will be
held in December at Université Laval, and which will include Richard
Matthew Stallman, founder of the FreeSoftwareFoundation and designer of
the GNU/Linux operating system. However, his participation has not yet
been confirmed. Quebec could give itself tools that would stimulate the
development of free software, believes Daniel Pascot, director of the
organizational information systems department at Université Laval\'s
faculty of administrative sciences. According to him, since we could use
a fairly large number of software programs, it would be pointless to try
to become a world leader in just a few. The development of this software
essentially relies on collaboration between specialists, often scattered
across the globe, he points out. \"Those who decide in free software are
those who code, they control its evolution.\" And for Quebec to position
itself in this field, it should be able to contribute to software
development: \"That means investing time, learning the software and
gaining recognition from the development team.\" He suggests \"offering
grants or scholarships so that individuals, spread across several
companies, in relation with the university, CEGEP or research centres,
become recognised developers.\" The Professional Association of Free
Software Companies of Quebec could, in his opinion, play a useful role
in the deployment of such an initiative. passelin@lesoleil.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1064

The Treasury Board is depriving itself of millions of dollars in savings
by turning its back on free software, at a time when it wants to rev up
IT spending, argues the Parti Québécois. Marie Malavoy, the official
opposition\'s spokesperson for higher education and research, and
Sylvain Simard, the spokesperson for the Treasury Board, public service
and government services, have put together a dossier to denounce the
Liberal government\'s inertia on this issue. In 2004, Ms. Malavoy
recalls, the government committed to making room for free software in
its report on e-government. Six years later, it took a court ruling to
force the government to only consider this option in its calls for
tenders. According to her, \"the government maintains a technological
dependence on Microsoft when it should instead have a real policy on the
use of free software and open formats within its administration.\"
Quebec gains nothing from limiting itself to Microsoft\'s
quasi-monopoly, adds Sylvain Simard. \"What profits do we get from the
millions of dollars we pay it in licenses?\" he says. \"The only two
retailers authorized to do business with Quebec are based in Toronto. We
are a colony, they send us the product and we buy it, with no other
spinoff.\" The two MNAs cited examples of savings achieved through the
implementation of open source software. The Seigneurie-des-Mille-Îles
school board uses the OpenOffice suite on 9,000 workstations. It saves
\$800,000 in licenses over a four- to five-year period. In Europe, the
French Gendarmerie has saved seven million euros (CAN\$9.8 million) per
year, and the Swedish police have reduced their IT costs by 50% in five
years, thanks to solutions based on open source software. They also cite
the example of the merger in 2007 between the New York Stock Exchange
(NYSE) and the Euronext group. NYSE-Euronext, now the world\'s leading
group of stock exchanges, then switched to open source software.
According to the architect responsible for the IT system, the savings
are in the order of 50%, but above all, the system architecture has been
greatly simplified. Health record \"In Quebec, we are running into
problems that we cannot solve with our current systems and that are
costing us more and more,\" laments Marie Malavoy. \"That\'s one more
reason to make a change.\" And in the face of the failures of the Quebec
Health Record, Sylvain Simard believes that open source software offers
flexibility that can be extremely useful. \"Currently, we develop in a
centralized manner using rigid software, and no one really knows what
they\'re doing. The regions create their own health records because the
proposed solution does not offer them the ability to adapt the system to
their needs. Using free software, we can allow users to participate in
the development of the solution and make their work easier.\"
passelin@lesoleil.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1065

\"We can no longer put the brakes on the development of free software in
public administration and in businesses,\" summarized Marie Malavoy, PQ
spokesperson for higher education, research and loans and scholarships,
who, with her colleague Sylvain Simard, decided to campaign for this
other way of looking at IT. \"For six years, the government has often
talked about free software and the importance of considering it in its
development. But it does nothing.\" The PQ recalled yesterday that
several countries of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD) have adopted policies and measures in recent years to
promote and encourage this free software within their administrations.
Unlike so-called proprietary software, often marketed by the giant
Microsoft, this type of application does not come with costly user
licenses. They can also be easily customized according to the needs of
users. \"The current context indicates that we must think about the
issue,\" said Ms. Malavoy. Free software is a way to reduce government
spending.\" The document presented by the PQ emphasizes that, while
removing pressure on the government budget, this software also reduces
the government\'s dependence on a single IT provider, facilitates the
exchange of data between several services, secures IT data, and also
increases the government\'s digital autonomy. \"Free software also has
the advantage of encouraging the local IT service industry with, in the
long term, the possibility of having real Quebec expertise in this
field\" which is expanding all over the world. The PQ\'s position comes
a few days after a group of activists from this party launched a call
for greater digital governance in Quebec. The project has been called PQ
numérique (pqnumérique.org) and calls, among other things, for the
promotion of open IT standards. The idea of free software is
increasingly gaining ground in government bodies, especially since a
judgment against the Régie des rentes du Québec, which was rebuked by
the court for not considering this possibility in a recent call for
tenders to change office suites in several of its computers. More
recently, due to strong criticism, the Société de transport de Montréal
had to suspend a call for tenders that favoured products from the
multinational Microsoft, in order to see what place the public carrier
could make for free software in its IT environment.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1066

In 1929, Dziga Vertov filmed Man with a Movie Camera, a manifesto for a
cinema reality in opposition to Hollywood fables. In 2008, New York
artist Perry Bard called on Internet users to remake the film. Man With
A Movie Camera, the Global Remake is a participatory video filmed by
volunteers around the world, based on Vertov\'s original scenes that
take us through a day in the city, from dawn to dusk, between Moscow,
kyiv and Odessa. Internet users can download one of the 1,700 shots from
the film and offer their own interpretation. Perry Bard thus makes
possible the ambitious project that the Soviet avant-garde filmmaker
could only have imagined in his dreams. Vertov is one of the few to have
thought of cinema not as an \"art of the masses\" but as a \"mass
activity\". His goal was to launch a war machine against bourgeois
cinema, the Kinoks, enlisting pioneers and working-class youth to record
people\'s daily lives, to edit and distribute the films in a continuous
flow. In the Internet age, legions of Kinoks, equipped with lightweight
cameras and rapid means of communication, are now on the move. The
phenomenon has a name: \"crowdsourcing\", a neologism attributed to Jeff
Howe and Mark Robinson, literally \"supply by the crowd\", consisting of
using the creativity or know-how of a large number of Internet users.
Rotation. For the remix of Man with a Movie Camera, several hundred
participants uploaded (and continue to do so) their shots. Their images
scroll side by side with those of Vertov, creating interesting
correspondences. The software created for the project (in open source)
puts the process entirely in the hands of the contributor. If several
have chosen the same shots, the software broadcasts a new variant of the
film in daily rotation. Bard\'s constructivist project goes even further
than Vertov\'s by delegating the editing to the machine. Participatory
films, made thanks to contributions from Internet users, have since
multiplied, more or less according to the same formula. Thus this
summer, during the Edinburgh art festival, Blipfoto initiated a film
inspired by pre-cinematic techniques. Life Turns revisits the zoetrope,
an optical toy that gives the illusion of movement. The project is
inspired by studies on walking carried out at the end of the 19th
century by Eadweard Muybridge, a British scientist famous for his
photographic decompositions of movement. The Internet user chooses one
of the positions in the sequence, takes a photo and sends it to the site
to enrich the film. The result is a long collective walk around the
world, in which more than 1,200 people in 21 countries have already
participated. Life Turns is reminiscent of Eternal Moonwalk, made by
Internet users in homage to Michael Jackson and his legendary step.
Webcam. Dutchman Roel Wouters\' film Now Take A Bow is described as a
\"self-portrait of the audience.\" The director directs his volunteer
\"actors\" in front of a webcam, and their performances are integrated
into a film that is constantly being recomposed. In 2009, the Japanese
band Sour had already solicited its fans, inviting them into their music
video Hibi no Neiro, which won awards at festivals. Another variation is
The Johnny Cash Project, where Internet users were invited to draw a
portrait of the musician in a film frame by frame.
Http://dziga.perrybard.net www.blipfoto.com/lifeturns Nowtakeabow.com
Www.youtube.com/ watch?v=WfBlUQguvyw Thejohnnycashproject.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1067

INTERNET The idea is clever: while more and more Facebook users complain
about seeing their personal data slip away from them, a group of
students from New York University is betting on an open community
network, \"which cares about privacy\". Its name: Diaspora. A preview
version is planned for early October. The principle: each of its members
will keep their personal information on their own computer or on a
secure site instead of entrusting it to the network operators. And to
prove their good faith, the students in question published the source
code of Diaspora last week, to let specialists examine it in detail.
Cruel disappointment: the programmers who studied it estimated that it
was riddled with rather formidable security flaws. According to them, a
hacker could easily enter the network and take control of an account
using a simple small program. This would allow him to usurp a user\'s
identity, delete photos or recruit new \"friends\" without their
consent. Of course, the four students had warned that their code, which
was not yet finalized, contained bugs and security flaws. But they did
not expect such a result\... They still have a few weeks to correct
these problems and strengthen the security of their program.
codesourceopen to the public The designers of Diaspora, who raised
\$200,000 for its development (the founder of Facebook is one of the
investors), are counting on their first users to improve the project.
The curious can test its functions on a special page that reveals an
interface quite similar to that of Facebook, but more sober. This is
also one of Diaspora\'s major assets: by collecting feedback from
everyone and opening the source code to the public, problems will
probably be corrected more quickly, if not more effectively, than if it
were a closed proprietary software. All developers can thus contribute
to the program and submit their own improvements, in the same way as
what already exists for software such as FireFox, OpenOffice or Linux.
However, fans of free software note that nothing prevents the creators
of Diaspora from moving towards a proprietary model in the medium or
long term\... which would make it a Facebook bis. In the meantime, the
newcomer is multiplying the arguments to convince at least a part of
Facebook\'s half a billion users. Those who take the plunge will thus be
able to share their profile and import their data on the alternative
network. Will this be enough for it to find its place between Facebook,
Twitter, MySpace, Ping, LinkedIn and other Buzz? The answer in a few
months\...

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1068

Even before the Hadopi law was implemented, Internet users developed
methods to circumvent it. Here is a brief summary of the most well-known
and most widely used illegal downloading techniques in France and
elsewhere. For the bad guys: the Hackdopi router Parisian hackers had
fun tinkering with a Wi-Fi router capable of hacking their
neighborhood\'s Wi-Fi connections, even when they are protected by an
encryption key. To do this, they borrowed a security tool designed to
test for flaws in Wi-Fi networks and installed it on an open router used
by community Wi-Fi networks. An anonymous blogger named this system
\"Hackdopi\", and the name stuck. Hackdopi identifies all Wi-Fi
connections within range of its antennas and begins to decipher their
keys. As soon as it has managed to crack one, it connects to the
Internet under its victim\'s IP (Internet Protocol) number, without
their knowledge. The hacker can then download anything with complete
impunity. When the owner of the connection turns off his router,
Hackdopi automatically switches to a neighbor\'s router. Of course, the
victims of this hijacking could be accused of illegal downloading. To
defend themselves, it will be complicated: Hadopi could consider that
the victim is an accomplice, because their Wi-Fi was not sufficiently
protected or refuse to believe in the hacking theory. To avoid these
inconveniences for their victims, hackers can equip Hackdopi with
software that sends erroneous IP addresses over the network. They are
also considering creating mini-networks made up of several pirate
routers covering the same neighborhood. They will thus be able to
combine the computing power of several computers to crack encryption
keys more quickly and share pirated connections. For the stealthy: VPNs
Another solution for downloading without being detected: the VPN
(Virtual Private Network), a system designed to guarantee the anonymity
of its users. A VPN consists of a data encryption system and a set of
relay servers scattered across several countries. When a user connects
through a VPN, their data is anonymously passed from server to server
before reaching its destination, which completely obscures any trail.
There are hundreds of commercial paid VPNs, created to protect the data
of SMEs that cannot afford their own security service. The subscription
costs a few euros per month. A well-organized hacker can use a VPN to
stream music and films from a small personal server, and recruit users
by circulating their addresses on forums. There are also free VPNs,
originally designed to help political dissidents living in dictatorial
countries communicate without being detected by the police. The most
famous is the TOR project, run by a group of American and European
activists, and funded by NGOs and governments of democratic countries.
Some activist VPNs kick out Internet users who download too much music
and films because they clog up their servers. Others, on the contrary,
welcome illegal downloaders, whom they consider to be dissidents
fighting against a repressive state subservient to show business
multinationals. Note the emergence of hybrid VPNs, managed in a militant
spirit but requiring a contribution from their users. The best known is
the Swedish e-Predator, which belongs to Pirate Bay, one of the largest
illegal download services in the world. For the emancipated: the capture
of \"streaming\" Lawyers and salespeople distinguish between
downloading, where the Internet user keeps a copy of the work, and
streaming, which allows the work to be listened to or watched live, as
on the radio or television. In reality, streaming software begins by
downloading the file into a buffer, which is erased at the end of the
session. However, there is a lot of software on the Internet that can
capture the buffer and transform it into permanent memory. It is thus
possible to download works illegally while connected to a legal site. To
do this, you have the choice between free software, such as
FreeMusicZilla, and commercial software, such as TubeMaster or
CrazyLoader. There is also a mini-software that can be integrated into
the Firefox browser, called Download Helper, which allows you to
download streaming streams in one click. Similarly, the new version of
the streaming player Real Player has a downloader function. Some
streaming sites such as Deezer or Myspace have implemented systems
preventing their streams from being captured. We are witnessing the
beginning of an endless war between pirates, who will constantly invent
systems for capturing protected streams, and streaming sites, condemned
to invent new anti-download systems each time. For nomads:
diversification of sources Initially, Hadopi will concentrate its
efforts on peer-to-peer networks such as Kazaa, eMule, Limewire or
Bittorrent. It is therefore perhaps less risky to return to traditional
downloading from large hosting sites, such as Rapidshare (based in
Switzerland), Mediafire (in Texas), or Megaupload (in Hong Kong), which
indiscriminately store billions of documents from all sources and which
are increasingly used by distributors of pirated works. These mega-hosts
are paid for by heavy users, and free for occasional users. Unlike
peer-to-peer, they do not require special software, and their traffic is
the same as that of ordinary websites. Taking advantage of the
widespread use of very high speeds and the continuing decline in storage
costs, pirates are increasingly offering large files, of better quality
than MP3 format. When you deposit a file with one of these hosts, you
receive a unique Internet address in return. Only the holders of this
address can find the file, which, in principle, limits its distribution.
But we have seen the emergence of specialized search engines providing
lists of addresses corresponding to the title of a film or a piece of
music. Recently, Google has started to imitate them. The success of
mega-hosts has given rise to a myriad of intermediary commercial sites,
which give out precious addresses in exchange for the requester\'s email
address or which sell passwords to read their files. Note that Hadopi
will give priority to music and films. Pirates of video games and
digital books can continue in peace.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1069

Tomorrow, when you open your computer and see the Windows or iTunes
logo, spare a thought for those celebrating free software. For the
seventh year, people around the world will be celebrating software that,
unlike proprietary software, can be reproduced, modified and used
without restriction. If Linux and Ubuntu are just cute names for a cat
to you, think about the Firefox browser, without a doubt the free
software that has become the most popular with the general public. In
Quebec, conferences, happy hours and demonstrations are on the menu for
the day. \"The free software community is active all year long, so Free
Software Day is more relaxed than before. It\'s less combative,\" says
Fabian Rodriguez, a free technology advisor and employee at Canonical.
Now that people are familiar with Firefox and many have installed
OpenOffice on their computers, what\'s the next creation from the
\"free\" world that will break the bank? Fabian Rodriguez is banking on
mobility. He cites the example of Google\'s mobile operating system,
Android. \"People will discover that with open source software, you can
do 95% of what Apple charges for on its iPhone for free. The
applications are free. Plus, you can participate in the development of
the software. People don\'t need to know that it\'s open source
software.\" An important year Open Source Software Day will have a
special flavor this year. In June, a Superior Court judge ruled that the
Régie des rentes du Québec acted illegally when it acquired software
from Microsoft without conducting a call for tenders. It was the open
source software company Savoir-Faire Linux that brought the case to
court, after the RRQ refused authorization to submit a proposal. A few
months later, the Société des transports de Montréal decided to suspend
a call for tenders for the acquisition of Microsoft Office 2010 licenses
to \"analyze the impacts of implementing a new office platform like
OpenOffice or other comparable products.\" \"Today, the adoption of free
software is greater,\" Fabian Rodriguez rejoices. \"For the past few
months, it\'s been impressive. Before, we felt like conspirators!\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1070

Tomorrow, when you open your computer and see the Windows or iTunes
logo, spare a thought for those celebrating free software. For the
seventh year, people around the world will be celebrating software that,
unlike proprietary software, can be reproduced, modified and used
without restriction. If Linux and Ubuntu are just cute names for a cat
to you, think about the Firefox browser, without a doubt the free
software that has become the most popular with the general public. In
Quebec, conferences, happy hours and demonstrations are on the menu for
the day. \"The free software community is active all year long, so Free
Software Day is more relaxed than before. It\'s less combative,\" says
Fabian Rodriguez, a free technology advisor and employee at Canonical.
Now that people are familiar with Firefox and many have installed
OpenOffice on their computers, what\'s the next creation from the
\"free\" world that will break the bank? Fabian Rodriguez is banking on
mobility. He cites the example of Google\'s mobile operating system,
Android. \"People will discover that with free software, you can do 95%
of what Apple charges for on its iPhone for free. The applications are
free. Plus, you can participate in the development of the software.
People don\'t need to know that it\'s free software.\" An important year
Free Software Day will have a special flavor this year. In June, a
Superior Court judge ruled that the Régie des rentes du Québec acted
illegally when it acquired software from Microsoft without conducting a
call for tenders. It was the free software company Savoir-Faire Linux
that brought the case before the courts, after being refused
authorization by the RRQ to submit a proposal. A few months later, the
Société des transports de Montréal decided to suspend a call for tenders
for the acquisition of Microsoft Office 2010 licenses to \"analyze the
impacts of implementing a new office platform like OpenOffice or other
comparable products.\" \"Today, the adoption of free software is
greater,\" Fabian Rodriguez rejoices. \"For the past few months, it\'s
been impressive. Before, we felt like conspirators!\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1071

It\'s hard to imagine a more hermetic network than Facebook, even though
it has half a billion members. The company guards its code carefully, as
well as the private data its members provide. For the past year, four
New Yorkers in their early twenties have been working on their \"free\"
social network project, a sort of open Facebook \"that cares about
privacy.\" Diaspora promises that each user will have their personal
information on their own computer, rather than entrusting it to a third
party. The social network published its source code this week. Soon, all
Internet users should be able to use Diaspora. \"Their approach is a
little strange. Often, community projects invite everyone to
participate, seek consensus. This is the opposite. It\'s a small group
of people who made decisions very quickly, working in absolute
secrecy,\" says Fabian Rodriguez. He also notes that the instigators of
the project are strangely distant from the free software community and
are making decisions that can seem contradictory. \"One of the first
things they\'re aiming for is to collaborate with Facebook! Sometimes
you have to open up a little more to make yourself known.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1072

On the esplanade of Beaubourg, a street vendor hands out DVDs to
visitors who rush into the museum. \"Treat yourself to the videos from
the collection of the Centre Pompidou for 1 euro.\" With knockdown
prices and photocopied covers, the stall is full of counterfeits, but
instead of Hollywood blockbusters, it offers films by the Wooster Group,
Michael Snow, Thomas Hirschhorn and Jordi Colomer. The reseller, wearing
a badge with an inverted C, the symbol of Copyleft (1), as opposed to
the C for copyright, says he works for IP Production, which has all the
necessary authorizations. \"Disseminate.\" The contraband workshop is
said to be located in the heart of the Centre Pompidou. As part of a new
series \"Voir/revoir\", the institution is giving artists carte blanche
to explore the museum\'s collection and audiovisual archives. First
guest, Tania Bruguera, visual artist, video artist, performer born in
1968 in Cuba, wanted to address, with \"IP Detournement\", the question
of access to these works. In particular to video art, the diffusion of
which is dependent on these institutions. The artist contacted 100
artists from the \"new media\" collection by email to ask them if they
would accept that pirated copies of their works be sold around
Beaubourg, by students and street vendors, for the benefit of the
latter, with the aim of democratic diffusion. \"Originally, artists used
the video medium precisely because it was easy to reproduce and
therefore to disseminate\", recalls Tania Bruguera. Those who accepted
this Deal are presented in the exhibition, which is held at Forum -1,
with the approval of the Pompidou Center, which nevertheless declines
all responsibility for the sale of the copies. Among the artists
contacted, 63 responded favorably, including Martin Le Chevallier. He
agreed to four interactive works: \"I have no problem with that, none of
the pieces in question are limited editions and, if they are not, it is
because I share the same democratic concerns.\" In Bulk. \"Intellectual
property (IP) is at the heart of the debates, in the era of open source
culture,\" says Tania Bruguera, who wanted to confront the artists with
these questions and encourage them to take a stand. Which they did, in a
correspondence posted on the walls. The negative responses, made
anonymous, are also argued: fear of losing control of their work, of the
poor quality of the copy, criticism of the pseudo-subversive nature of
their action. Bruguera chooses to present the works in an unpleasant
device, highlighting the inconvenient presentation conditions of video
art. In bulk, under a pale light, in the middle of piles of cardboard
and pallets, stacked on shelves, televisions broadcast videos in a
continuous stream, in a hubbub of tangled images and sounds, without
contextualization. Next door, a cinema with a red carpet, where the
videos are projected on a big screen. But, here again, access is barred
and the absence of seats prevents one from settling in comfortably.
Between storage and sanctification, the device ensures that one cannot
watch the films and pushes spectators to buy copies sold in the street,
then to watch the DVDs at home. \"Despite the efforts made to attract
wider audiences, video art is one of the mediums that continues to
suffer from the idea that the museum is both a place of passage and a
place of preservation of culture,\" says the performer. This action
exhibition, which will result in a free downloadable digital book (2),
is also a practical application of an essay published in the journal
Artforum this summer, in which she stigmatized the lack of risk-taking
by cultural institutions and their \"desire to transform the instability
that characterizes art into a serene experience.\" She said she dreamed
of a museum \"that would be closer to the Internet, open source and
Wikipedia culture.\" The street vendors will hang around the fountain,
the Beaubourg library, and one of the metro lines for a week. (1)
Copyleft is the possibility given by the author of a work subject to
copyright to copy, use, modify or distribute his work. (2)
www.taniabruguera.com Photo Raphaël Dautigny

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1073

Digital textbooks are all the rage this school year. Particularly in the
second year of high school. They compensate for the absence of
traditional textbooks at the start of high school. In June, school
publishers announced that nearly half of second year students would not
have a paper version of their textbooks at the start of the 2010 school
year. The cause is the hasty implementation of the high school reform.
The new programs were made public on April 28. Too late for publishers
to prepare and print the new textbooks. They will be available in
mid-October. In the meantime, teachers and students can consult their
digital equivalents on the Web. The digital textbook currently occupies
a marginal place in the French education system. The cause is the delay
in the use of new technologies. The problem of missing textbooks in high
school could give it a boost. Especially since a newcomer, the company
Lelivrescolaire.fr, is offering its digital history-geography or French
textbooks free of charge. New competition that traditional school
publishers are watching with interest. A fledgling sector Determined not
to miss the train of new technologies, publishers are increasingly
accompanying the traditional paper textbook with its digital version.
The sector, still fledgling, only represents 1% of their turnover. But
its development is inevitable and, with it, the uncertainties that
accompany the production and distribution methods linked to new
technologies. The place of traditional publishing is certainly not
threatened by students increasing the pirated downloads of school
resources, as they do with songs or films. But unexpected competition
has appeared: that of school textbooks available free of charge online.
There is a risk that, as with music and cinema, the dematerialization of
textbooks will disrupt school publishing. Will the digital textbook
sound the death knell for the paper textbook? Towards a new economic
model Starting this fall, teachers and 5th grade students can, if they
wish, use a free digital French or history and geography textbook
available online (www.lelivrescolaire.fr). \"Created by teachers, our
textbooks offer the same educational guarantees as traditional
textbooks,\" assures Eric van Rompay, president of the company
Lelivrescolaire.fr. In parallel with its digital activity, the company,
to ensure its economic balance, sells equivalent paper textbooks. Who
would want to pay for a book that they can have for free online? The
answer is provided by Sésamath. Sésamath is an association of secondary
school mathematics teachers created in 2001 with the aim of providing
their colleagues with free resources and professional practices. Five
years ago, these teachers decided to go further by launching digital
textbooks. Today on their website (http://manuel.sesamath.net), they
cover the four levels of middle school, 6th, 5th, 4th, 3rd. \"The
publication and sale of the corresponding paper school textbooks,
provided by the company Génération 5, allows the association to finance
one full-time employee and four part-time employees,\" explains
Jean-Philippe Vanroyer, president of the association. This continued
interest in paper is confirmed by a Sofres survey in June: 90% of
teachers say they are satisfied with the complementarity of the two
media. Attentive publishers The major publishers in the sector recognize
the success of Sésamath. Director of Magnard editions and president of
Savoir Livre, an association that brings together the major players in
school publishing, Belin, Bordas, Hachette, Hatier, Magnard and Nathan,
Isabelle Magnard notes: \"Sésamath\'s publishing work is not
insignificant. It occupies 15% of the market for mathematics textbooks
in middle school. We consider it to be a publisher in its own right.\"
However, it does not constitute an economic model. Its operating base is
based on the very heavy voluntary work of its 80 active members, helped
by occasional contributions from its many supporters. These constraints
have prevented Sésamath from gaining traction: mutualist associations
with the same goals, such as Weblettres for French, or Les Clionautes
for history and geography, have not gone so far as to create their own
textbooks. The emergence of Lelivrescolaire.fr changes the situation.
This commercial company pays its employees. Like Sésamath, it designs
its textbooks using free software, an asset for teachers keen on new
technologies who can enrich the textbook with their own contributions.
Its main purpose is to cover all disciplinary fields at all levels of
middle school, with the notable exception of mathematics due to the
development of Sésamath. Its success would revolutionize the sector\'s
economy. Digital is struggling to make its mark School publishers say
they do not feel directly threatened by the newcomers. \"I await their
development with curiosity and interest,\" assures Isabelle Magnard. The
members of Savoir Livre intend to transpose their dominant position to
the field of digital publishing. To do this, they are demanding that the
State align the VAT rate for digital textbooks with paper textbooks,
i.e. 5.5% instead of the current 19.60%. They are also waiting for
specific funding to be released to schools to encourage teachers to buy
digital textbooks. But they still have to want to: even though its
equipment places it in the average, European statistics rank France 24th
out of 27 countries in terms of the use of digital tools in an
educational context.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1074

At the foot of the Dortmunder U, a brewery converted into an art venue
in Dortmund, Germany, a new kind of pop-up canteen, Instructables
Restaurant, opened last week. Recipes, furniture, decor, and menus were
all downloaded from Instructables.com. The DIY bible, this platform
brings together the largest community dedicated to Do it Yourself (DIY)
and is one of those sites (along with Make) that have flourished in
reaction to consumerist society and disposable products. Hundreds of
thousands of enthusiasts share their know-how in all areas, posting
detailed manuals for making a bamboo bike, a cider press, a Rubik\'s
Cube cake, or setting up a bunker in the basement of their house\...
\"These online instructions are licensed under a Creative Commons
license, anyone can use them, be inspired by them, or adapt them to
their needs. \"We thought: why not turn this mass of information into a
real restaurant?\" says Dutch artist Arne Hendriks, co-founder with Bas
Van Abel of this open-source bistro, which was first activated during
Nuit Blanche in Amsterdam in June. \"The Internet is information
pornography that we feed on daily. The idea is to take this information
online and apply it in the real world,\" explains the owner, while
watching his simmering pumpkin soup, made from the recipe of Jayefuu, a
computer and cooking enthusiast living in Surrey, Great Britain.
Everyone is invited to taste it and improve it by leaving their
appreciations, giving immediate feedback to those who have posted this
knowledge online. \"The originality of the restaurant is that its chefs
are based all over the world,\" jokes Hendriks. They are all credited,
in small cooking cards generously provided: Tomato Pecorino Soup by Nico
Groot, Barbecue Teriyake by Mhbaben, Limonade minute by Laurent 123\...
Comfortably installed in the Barrel chairs, plastic barrels recycled
into armchairs, designed by Monkeybrad, who lives in Tennessee, we find
out about the miniature grill for Marshmallow, imagined by jwilson27, a
computer scientist based in Missouri. Because when you go to
Instructables restaurant, you don\'t just eat the dish and pay the bill.
You leave full but also capable of making the furniture from scratch.
Like these simple and functional stools made from beer crates,
polystyrene and multi-colored adhesive. \"Here, if you need a table or a
chair, take matters into your own hands and make one yourself. If it
starts to rain, make a shelter.\" The inventions made there are in turn
the subject of a guide that will enrich the database of the
instructables.com site. Henriks chose the restaurant because \"it\'s a
place where you sit down and spend time. The kitchen is also the last
workshop, the last place of creation where you make and transform
ingredients.\" The restaurant is also launching a pizza contest until
Sunday. The best recipes will be on the menu of the next Instructables
restaurant, which will be held at the Picnic festival in Amsterdam, from
September 22 to 24, whose theme is \"Redesign the world.\"
Www.instructablesrestaurant. com/ www.instructables.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1075

Perpignan Special Envoy - Who has never dreamed, while watching a film,
of speaking to the characters on the screen? With Prison Valley, this
idea is no longer science fiction. This \"participatory road movie\",
posted online in April, has just received the Web Documentary Award at
the Perpignan-Visa pour l\'image Photojournalism Festival. For two
years, the award has rewarded this emerging journalistic form that
offers Internet users a mix of video, animation, photo, sound and text.
Prison Valley investigates a county in the United States whose economy
revolves around the prison industry. It does so in an unprecedented way,
by pushing interactivity to its limits. The idea came from Philippe
Brault, a photographer who worked for the OEil public collective, and
David Dufresne, a former employee of Libération and a free software
activist, two journalists who \"were wondering about the future of the
profession\": \"The idea was to explore new possibilities for telling a
story,\" explains David Dufresne, \"without it being free or purely fun.
You don\'t have fun with confinement.\" In Prison Valley, visitors are
invited to sign up for a room in the motel where the two journalists had
taken up residence during the investigation. From there, they progress
at their own pace, following in the footsteps of the authors. The tour
is built around a 59-minute film, broadcast in July on the Arte channel,
co-producer of the project. Along the way, visitors can branch off to
look at photos and testimonies, consult statistics and links. But also
talk directly with other visitors, discuss on a forum, exchange via
social networks\... and even send questions to the \"characters\" who
wish. The authors have innovated at every turn, drawing ideas in
particular from online video games: you have to register to be able to
come back without having to do the whole thing again. And the visitor
progresses in stages, according to a certain order: \"We didn\'t want
Internet users to debate on the forum without first having seen the
section on the Supermax prison,\" explains Philippe Brault. And despite
a few flaws - an uninteresting survey, an annoying voiceover - the whole
thing is a success. The smooth navigation, the quality of the reporting
and the images immerse the viewer in a frightening place, where it is
the prisoners who build their own prisons. Interactivity, so often
practiced in a demagogic way on the Internet, is used here to transpose
the debate to France. \"This American example is there to make us think
about our situation,\" insists David Dufresne. For two months after it
went online in April, the authors organized chats every Thursday with
people involved in the French prison system, such as Jean-Marie Bockel,
Secretary of State for Justice. To date, nearly two hundred thousand
Internet users have visited Prison Valley. The figure is modest compared
to the million they had hoped for, but the feat is that 25% of them
watched the film all the way through - \"good news for those who say
that the Internet is not made for long forms!\" The duo also measures
the project\'s success by the activity on the forum. \"After three
weeks, there was a virulent campaign against us from Colorado,\" says
Philippe Brault. \"But there were also real debates between Americans.
And the guard at Supermax prison came to our defense!\" For the duo,
Prison Valley was first and foremost an attempt to do journalism
differently. For once, the characters represented had a say. \"The era
of the journalist-king is over,\" says David Dufresne. \"But there are
things that remain valid, such as the rigor of the investigation. Rather
than seeing the Internet as a constraint, we must see it as an
opportunity for our profession.\" Compared to traditional media, the Web
offers both freedom and immense space: the authors of Prison Valley were
able to choose the narrative form best suited to each situation, but
also include dozens of documents and interviews as bonuses - a luxury
unknown elsewhere. Could the web documentary then be the future of
photojournalism? Not so simple. Under its playful exterior, Prison
Valley required significant resources. More than two authors, it was in
fact an entire team, with a graphic designer and a flash developer, who
worked for nearly eighteen months. The budget of 320,000 euros was
financed by the production company Upian, the Arte channel and grants
from the CNC. \"The web documentary is not the sure thing,\"
acknowledges Philippe Brault. And not all subjects lend themselves to
it.\" While Prison Valley continues its life on the Internet, the two
friends have extended the story in the much more classic form of a book
with texts and images.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1076

This half-million dollar market had been roundly denounced for several
days by defenders of free software systems because it ignored a recent
legal decision that now requires public administrations to consider
using this type of so-called open software application. \"The call for
tenders was suspended by the board of directors to allow the STM to
assess the impact of implementing other comparable products,\" Odile
Paradis, spokesperson for the urban transport company, told Le Devoir
yesterday. \"A new call for tenders could then be launched.\" This
process, now suspended, was normally scheduled to end on September 8 at
3 p.m. On August 17, the STM raised the ire of the Association pour
l\'appropriation collective de l\'informatique libre (FACIL) with a call
for tenders for the acquisition of 2,577 licenses for the Microsoft
Office 2010 Standard office suite. The contract has an estimated value
of \$500,000. The reasons for the anger? The call for tenders, by
targeting a single IT supplier, Microsoft, in fact ignored a recent
judgment rendered last June in a dispute between Savoir-Faire Linux, a
supplier of free software, and the Régie des rentes du Québec. In a
40-page document, Judge Denis Jacques of the Superior Court of Quebec,
made illegal this type of transaction that favours a specific IT product
and excludes other viable and equivalent solutions, according to him.
\"Good news\" \"The decision of the STM board of directors is good
news,\" said Cyrille Béraud, president of the Association
professionnelle des entreprises en logiciellibres, yesterday. \"It shows
that society is open to free software. We are waiting to see what
happens next, but it seems promising to us.\" For several years,
advocates of free software have been trying to make themselves heard by
the public administration in Quebec, which is still struggling to open
its computer systems to free applications, the adoption of which often
allows for significant savings. Free software is also presented as a way
to ensure greater network flexibility and greater security of government
computer data. Public bodies in the United States, at the call of Barack
Obama, but also in France and Brazil have decided to make more room for
these computer solutions in the future. The Quebec government has still
not ruled on this issue.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1077

The board of directors of the Société des transports de Montréal (STM)
decided yesterday to suspend the call for tenders for the acquisition of
2,577 standard Microsoft Office 2010 licenses. This call for tenders had
been criticized because the STM immediately excluded suppliers who
wanted to submit a proposal based on open source software, such as the
OpenOffice office suite. This approach goes against a judgment rendered
earlier this summer by the Superior Court of Quebec, which declared
illegal a transaction by the Régie des rentes du Québec carried out
under similar conditions. \"The members of the board of directors
discussed the Microsoft licensing issue today and decided to suspend the
call for tenders process in order to analyze the impacts of implementing
a new office platform such as OpenOffice or other comparable products,\"
said Odile Paradis, Senior Director - Public Affairs at the STM, in an
email. \"This is good news,\" rejoiced Daniel Pascot, director of the
Department of Organizational Information Systems at Université Laval and
president of the FACIL association, \"FACIL, pour l\'Appropriation
Collective de l\'Informatique Libre,\" yesterday. The judgment in the
Savoir-Faire Linux/RRQ case provides that before short-circuiting the
normal call for tenders process, we must be able to rely on a \"serious
and documented\" study. The City of Montreal\'s procurement policy also
provides that we must \"ensure that the acquisition methods call for
healthy competition between suppliers.\" \"Whether they will do the
analysis internally or entrust it to an external firm, we will see, in
any case we intend to obtain access to the results of this analysis to
ensure that it corresponds to the criteria mentioned in the judgment,\"
concluded Mr. Pascot. passelin@lesoleil.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1078

Under heavy fire from critics, the Société de transport de Montréal
(STM) decided yesterday to suspend its call for tenders for the
acquisition of Microsoft brand software, in order to evaluate the
possibility of opening this purchasing process to free software. A new
call for tenders could then be launched. The STM raised the ire of the
Association pour l\'appropriation collective de l\'informatique libre
with a call for tenders for the acquisition of 2,577 licenses of the
Microsoft Office 2010 Standard office suite, a contract estimated at
\$500,000.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1079

The lobby group is also calling on the company\'s executives, as well as
the mayor of Montreal, to force a review of this major software
purchase. Reason? Two months ago, the Superior Court of Quebec ruled
that this type of IT contract award by the public administration was
illegal. \"This type of practice is not in accordance with the law, is
not in the interest of the STM, does not respect the values of fairness
and freedom of Quebec society, harms Quebec\'s technological
independence and does not promote sustainable technological
development,\" the Association stated in a press release earlier this
week. On August 17, the STM published a call for tenders for the
purchase of several hundred software programs. The call is for \"the
acquisition of 2,577 licenses\" of the standard Microsoft Office 2010
office suite, the American giant\'s flagship product. The contract has
an estimated value of \$500,000. It does not consider any other product.
For the Association, this appeal is surprising because it ignores an
important judgment rendered on June 3 in a case between the Régie des
rentes du Québec and the company Savoir-Faire Linux. This free software
merchant denounced the awarding of a \$723,000 contract to an exclusive
distributor of Microsoft products in 2008 when open-access software, and
therefore less expensive, could have been considered. This reading was
confirmed by the court, which thus made this process of awarding a
contract to a designated IT supplier illegal. \"The STM\'s call for
tenders surprises us, but only halfway,\" Cyrille Béraud, president of
the Professional Association of Free Software Companies, told Le Devoir
yesterday. Free software calls for a major paradigm shift in the IT
field to move from a monopoly market to a competitive market. Even if
there is an openness here and there, the public administration is not
yet completely ready for this change.\" Yesterday, the Société de
transport de Montréal did not wish to comment on this contract award for
so-called proprietary software belonging to Microsoft, on the pretext
that the matter must be on the agenda of its board of directors meeting
today. The call for tenders, launched two weeks ago, ends on September 8
at 3 p.m. Let us recall that free software is currently seeking its
place in several public administrations around the world, such as in the
United States, where Barack Obama has decided to give it a larger place.
These free applications are increasingly favoured in order to reduce the
costs related to software acquisition, but also to ensure greater
digital flexibility and security of government computer data.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1080

Ignoring a decision rendered in June by the Superior Court, the Société
de transport de Montréal (STM) has just launched a call for tenders for
the purchase of 2,577 standard Microsoft Office 2010 licenses, closing
the door to equivalent open source software solutions. The contract
represents an approximate value of \$500,000. By limiting its call for
tenders to Microsoft licenses only, the STM is preventing other
suppliers from submitting a proposal based on the OpenOffice office
suite. However, in a decision rendered on June 3, Judge Denis Jacques
concluded that the Régie des rentes du Québec (RRQ) had acted illegally
when it refused to consider open source software during a purchase, also
limited to Microsoft office suites and operating systems. The Quebec
government acknowledged the decision, which has not been appealed, while
the STM is acting as if the judgment did not concern it. This is what
Daniel Pascot, director of the Department of Organizational Information
Systems at Université Laval and president of the association FACIL,
\"Facil, pour l\'Appropriation Collective de l\'Informatique Libre\",
maintains. \"We are seeing once again the awarding of a contract to the
multinational Microsoft without competition, without comparison with
free software solutions, and this, despite a severe judgment that
imposed the opening of public markets to free software solutions.\" The
City of Montreal\'s procurement policy stipulates that during a call for
tenders, it must be \"ensure that the acquisition methods involve
healthy competition\". Illegal act The STM is not respecting the
judgment, also believes lawyer Julius Grey, who had pleaded, with Me
Marc-Aurèle Racicot, for the company Savoir-faire Linux, in the RRQ
case. \"It would be sad to see that public bodies in Quebec are aware of
a judgment but do not apply it.\" According to him, the STM\'s call for
tenders is illegal. \"The judgment established the principle that in the
public domain, the call for tenders is mandatory, the exceptions are
limited and must be interpreted very narrowly. Unless there are
exceptional reasons, the judgment must apply.\" The president of FACIL
is asking Michel Labrecque, chairman of the STM board of directors, to
immediately suspend the call for tenders. He is also asking the mayor of
the metropolis, Gérald Tremblay, to change the STM\'s decision. The
issue must also be studied today by the board of directors of the
Société des transports, indicated yesterday Isabelle Tremblay,
spokesperson for the STM. passelin@lesoleil.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1081

In the same voice, we also want to denounce the sensationalist and
misinformed speeches that have emerged in the media on the occasion of
these events. The repression deliberately targeted activists whose only
crime was to be dressed in black. The media, also interested in the
clothing fashion of the anarchists, are making headlines with images of
\"young\" troublemakers and are attacking the famous \"black bloc\"
whose name is repeated ad nauseam, thus claiming to understand the
phenomenon. As if there were no political content behind the various
tactics used\... Values that disturb Ignorance of the field,
intellectual laziness or primacy of the commercial vocation of the
media? Perhaps. However, it is clear that one of the main reasons why
people seek to criminalize and intimidate those who identify with
anarchism is the fact that these people make up an ever-growing movement
that conveys values that are contrary to those of the proponents of the
capitalist project. Cooperation instead of competition; mutual aid
instead of individualism; self-management instead of hierarchy; respect
instead of racism, (hetero)sexism, ageism; freedom instead of control.
Freedom, for anarchists, is at the heart of humanity, and cannot exist
without equality. This freedom, far from that conceived by liberal
society, actually aims at personal development inseparable from
collective well-being. Equality, for its part, becomes possible when the
people directly concerned take charge of all aspects that affect their
lives: political decisions, the provision of services, the production of
goods, land use planning. Yet the State, a close ally of the capitalist
world, seems determined to prevent anarchist ideas and practices, based
on these positive values, from spreading more widely in society. Knowing
that a large part of the population feels crushed by an ever-growing
sense of helplessness in the face of the injustices of this world, the
State uses all the means at its disposal to silence dissidents who
propose alternative paths to a better world. In order to maintain its
legitimacy, it therefore seeks to interfere with the construction of a
mass movement based on anarchist values. A strong movement It is the
practical application of these values that is at the heart of the work
of the CRAC, a research group affiliated with Concordia University. For
five years now, the CRAC has been carrying out patient field work, in
collaboration with networks and collectives in Quebec that are based on
anarchist values, to document their ideals, their practices, their modes
of action and organization. What emerges from our work is that this is a
movement that exists well beyond the raucous demonstrations to which we
would like to reduce it. Here in Quebec, this movement is indeed made up
of several hundred people, who volunteer, with their guts and their
revolts, animate a space for political reflection and action on the
margins of an institutional system that is at an impasse. These people
seek to apply the values that inspire them in their daily struggles in
areas of activity as varied as those of the defense of the rights of
immigrants and refugees, gays, lesbians and queers, against war,
imperialism, colonization, ecological destruction, gentrification,
sexism, junk food or police repression, to name but a few. Creating a
better world here and now These anarchists, treated like terrorists on
the streets of Toronto, study in our colleges and universities, are
involved in their children\'s school committees, take care of their
loved ones, work in community groups, sell you your bread or serve your
coffee in neighborhoods that they help transform. These people create
activist coffee bars, independent bookstores and libraries, alternative
media, neighborhood committees, self-managed cooperatives, libertarian
fanzines\... They offer the recycling of old bicycles, distribute free
software, form groups dedicated to organic food self-sufficiency
(through purchasing groups, seed sharing, agriculture)\... They reclaim
abandoned spaces to create housing cooperatives, parks, movie nights and
neighborhood parties. They organize spaces for the exchange of knowledge
and free schools for children\... The activists of the anarchist
movement experiment, within these projects, with modes of organization
and operation based on direct democracy and autonomy. All the people
involved in a project participate in decision-making, management and the
completion of tasks. There is no leader, no boss, no representative.
Mechanisms are put in place to facilitate discussions, the learning of
skills, participation in meetings, the creation of egalitarian social
relationships. Refusing government subsidies, these groups turn to
do-it-yourself, the recovery of materials and food and bartering in
order to reduce their dependence on capitalist exchanges. Rooted in
their communities, these groups therefore seek to set up autonomous
political, social, economic and cultural projects that break with the
logic of domination that motivates capitalist interest. These
initiatives convey another form of political connection, of \"living
together\", based on anarchist values and ties of proximity. By putting
their values and visions into practice in the present moment, these
groups attempt to make \"tiny everyday revolutions\", often in the
shadow of the spotlight. In doing so, they demonstrate to their
neighbors that they are able to organize themselves autonomously,
without depending on political and economic elites. And each time a
neighbor decides to get involved, she or he participates in the
construction of alternative institutions and projects, which one day, we
can only hope, will make those of the dominant system redundant and
obsolete. Interfering with the proper functioning of the dominant system
But the bearers of this dominant system will not let it happen. That is
why this long-term work is accompanied, as was the case during the G20,
by high-profile actions targeting the symbols of global capitalism.
These actions contribute to revealing the consequences of an unjust
system and to slowing down the consolidation of elite projects. History
shows us that the movements that have contributed to social change have
used a range of tactics ranging from popular education to sabotage to
civil disobedience. These latter tactics are therefore intended to
complement a range of initiatives rooted in common values that, taken as
a whole, constitute the terrain of struggle of contemporary anarchists
in Quebec. Thus, the media approach that reduces the movement to its
flashes of brilliance without highlighting their content is based on a
very narrow conception of politics. What is proposed in the media only
reveals the visible part of the iceberg of a much larger phenomenon.
Also, by massively repressing dissent under the pretext of the danger of
a few muscular actions, the attitude of the authorities reflects the
desire to silence a movement that is disturbing, especially by the
strength of its ideas and the depth of its roots. But the past also
shows us that those who are crushed always find the strength to get back
up\... \*\*\* Émilie Breton, Anna Kruzynski, Magaly Pirotte and Rachel
Sarrasin - Research collective on collective autonomy

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1082

SEVERAL WikiLeaks servers are hosted in Sweden by the company PRQ, which
has close ties to the famous Pirate Bay (a major site for illegal
downloading of music and films) and to the Swedish Pirate Party, a
powerful and organized political group. In Germany and the Netherlands,
WikiLeaks receives effective assistance from hacker associations and
free Internet activists. The German Daniel Schmitt, a collaborator who
had until now been very discreet, now appears as WikiLeaks\' number two.
In Iceland, Julian Assange has been almost a national hero since
WikiLeaks published the documents proving the corruption of the bankers
who ruined the country. He can no longer go to the United States, but
WikiLeaks is represented there by activists from the \"TOR\" project -
an encrypted and secure network that allows people to use the Internet
while remaining invisible and untraceable, on which WikiLeaks relies, in
part, for its connections. One of the creators of TOR, Jacob Appelbaum,
has established himself as the new de facto spokesman for WikiLeaks in
the United States. Mr. Appelbaum, 30, is a well-known free software
activist in San Francisco, having founded Noisebridge, the largest
hacker club in California, which has well-equipped offices in the city
center. Jacob Appelbaum spends his life traveling the world, especially
to dictatorships, where he helps political opponents secure their
Internet communications. In 2005, he spent several months in Iraqi
Kurdistan initiating youth groups in free software. He brought back a
traditional tattoo, a stylized peacock, which covers one arm and one
shoulder. On July 29, while returning from a trip to the Netherlands,
Mr. Appelbaum was stopped by the police at the New York airport and
questioned for three hours about WikiLeaks. The police also analyzed the
contents of his computer and confiscated his mobile phones. Two days
later, Jacob Appelbaum was in Las Vegas to attend Defcon, the big annual
convention of American hackers. There he spoke about TOR, and WikiLeaks.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1083

OTHER "CITIZEN RESEARCHERS" are launching into the creation of genetic
drugs, bypassing the big labs. Andrew Hessel, a Canadian biologist who
often spends time in Silicon Valley, has just created a cooperative
company called Pink Army, which will bring together women with breast
cancer and help them get involved in the fight against their disease,
using the Internet. Previously, Mr. Hessel had worked for a large
pharmaceutical laboratory for seven years: "We were a good team, with a
big budget. And yet, in seven years, we didn't put a single new drug on
the market -- just variations of existing drugs, to extend the patents.
We were prisoners of a legal and financial strategy." In reaction to his
former environment, Mr. Hessel organized his cooperative by taking
inspiration from the free software movement: all the research results
will be made available free of charge to the research community --
including private laboratories. Pink Army is banking on the continuing
advances in synthetic biology and virotherapy to design personalized
treatments: \"Each cancer is unique. So we\'re going to fight it with
drugs that are tailor-made to each patient\'s genetic makeup.\" This
means it won\'t be possible to test on other volunteers: each patient
will be her own guinea pig and will assume the risks with full knowledge
of the facts - which should simplify the paperwork. Pink Army, which
currently has 400 members, is not rich, but for Mr. Hessel, that\'s not
a problem: \"Synthetic biology has become cheap. If I want to make an
artificial virus that can kill a patient\'s cancer cells, I\'ll write
its genetic code on a computer, then send it to a specialized lab. A
week later, I\'ll receive my virus in the mail in a tube. If its genome
has 6,000 base pairs, it will cost me \$3,000. \"Mr. Hessel expects
reactions from the pharmaceutical industry, but says he is ready to face
them: \"We will stay outside the commercial circuit, and we will not use
patented products or techniques. I do not see how we can be attacked.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1084

The neurons were boiling yesterday afternoon at the Place de
l\'Université-du-Québec, as the 170 participants in the Bivouac Urbain
worked tirelessly on their creation. \"I\'m sorry if I\'m a little
confused,\" Joé Dupuis, who has been awake for over 24 hours, told Le
Soleil several times. The 21-year-old technophile is participating in
the competition for the second year, which ends today at 8 p.m. Like all
the teams, his team had to draw inspiration from the song Dan Dan, by
the group Misteur Vallaire, to design either a video game or a 2D or 3D
animated short film, a new part this year. And imagination was not
lacking. After a six-hour brainstorming session, his team Illogical
Studios decided to go for a highly original concept. \"The only words in
the song are \'wake up\'. So the goal of our game is for the character
to wake up at the end of the game,\" he explained. Their character will
go through different scenes, such as a meadow where they will have to
dig the ground with a shovel to reach the darkness. \"The bulk of the
work is done, but the challenge is to put it all together and not have
any gaps between the scenes,\" he explained. \"But we\'re going to
win!\" he added without any pretension. Room for the little ones
According to PÔLE Québec Chaudière-Appalaches, multimedia creation
generates an estimated \$250 million in revenue in the region. Nearly 60
companies employ 1,340 people. In the wake of major job providers like
Frima or Beenox, many small businesses want to carve out a place for
themselves among the big ones, like that of Joé, one of the four
founders of Illogical Studios. With his team of around ten employees, he
works from a basement in Cap-Rouge. Created 10 months ago, the company
has chosen a niche that has been little exploited until now: open source
engines. By making their platform accessible to small video game
designers, the group of enthusiasts hopes to build a bridge between the
small and the big. \"Often, large companies don\'t want to lend
\[resources\] to small designers they don\'t know. So, with our
platform, we\'re going to allow small people to produce a finished game
and transform it into a language compatible with all sorts of devices
like the Xbox or the iPhone. Then, they can go to Microsoft or
Activision to sell it to them,\" he explained. Already functional, their
platform should be ready for winter. In the meantime, don\'t hesitate to
go test their game tomorrow at noon. mjnantel@lesoleil.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1085

Madeleine Perreault Villeneuve is celebrating her 80th birthday today.
Her family and friends gathered on Saturday, July 24, at the Relais
Camping de la Montagne in Val-Bélair to celebrate the event. Mrs.
Villeneuve had 10 children between 1950 and 1965 (five boys and five
girls), has 19 grandchildren and 25 great-grandchildren and \"it looks
like\" four more are on the way. We are talking about a lineage of 58
people. Mrs. Villeneuve is probably the ancestor of the \"Superwomen\".
She supported her husband Charles-Omer, an enterprising businessman, in
his many projects by taking care of all sorts of tasks including
administration, accounting, supervising the boys with their tasks on the
farm and not to mention preparing good meals for the whole family and
maintaining her large house. Today, shopping is one of her favorite
activities. Happy birthday, Ms. Villeneuve. Congratulations and good
luck to Donald L. Gilbert, MBA, who, since July 26, has been the General
Manager of InfoGlobe in Quebec, an IT services company specializing in
free software and which represents the largest platform specializing in
free software (Open-Source) in Quebec, if not in Canada.
www.infoglobe.ca The Escaladon, held on May 29 under the honorary
presidency of Joanne Boivin, for the benefit of the Maison Richelieu
Hébergement Jeunesse Sainte-Foy, ultimately raised \$22,000. The funds
raised will be used to operate the Maison Richelieu Hébergement Jeunesse
Sainte-Foy, an Auberge du coeur which, for 25 years, has helped,
supported and accompanied teenage girls experiencing personal, family
and social difficulties, in developing their power to act. William
Samson, a 12-year-old musician, made his dream come true on July 15, to
meet the members of the band RUSH. Accompanied by his parents, Sonia
Carrier and Stéphan Samson, William experienced a magical evening, full
of surprises including drumsticks from drummer Neil Pert. Special thanks
to Jenny Carrier and Andy Curran from the band Coney Hatch for allowing
William to have a memorable experience. BIRTHDAYS Jean-François Breau,
singer (Changer), 32 years old, Fernando Alonso, Spanish Formula 1
driver (Renaud team), world champion in 2005 and 2006, 29 years old
Benoît Langlais, actor (2 Frères) 27 years old, Michel Brazeau, show
producer in Quebec City. Jean Rochon, doctor and Quebec politician.
Minister of Health (1994-1998), 72 years old. Ted Lindsay, NHL hockey
player (1944-1965, Red Wings, Blackhawks), member of the \"Production
Line\" with Gordie Howe and Sid Abel, 85 years old. DISAPPEARED July 29,
2007. Michel Serrault (photo), 79 years old, one of the sacred monsters
of French cinema. A figure of boulevard theater, he triumphed in the
role of Zaza Napoli in \"La Cage aux folles\". 2005. Al McKibbon, 86
years old, jazz bassist. 1993. Guy Dufresne, 78 years old, author of the
series \"Cap-aux-Sorciers\", \"Septième Nord\" and \"Les Forges de
Saint-Maurice\". 1992. Michel \"Bunny\" Larocque, 40 years old, former
goaltender for the Canadiens. 1983. Luis Buñuel, 83 years old, he
revolutionized the seventh art with ideas and images often considered
sacrilegious. 1974. \"Mama\" Cass Elliot, 32 years old, soloist of the
group The Mamas & The Papas. IN MEMORY July 29, 1985. Serge Savard
announces that Jacques Lemaire is giving up his position as head
instructor of the Canadiens. Jean Perron will take his place behind the
Tricolore bench.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1086

SINCE his election as President of the Assembly in June 2007, Bernard
Accoyer has committed, with the assistance of the Quaestors, to ensuring
that the State budget allocation does not increase by a single euro
cent, which represents savings of 150 million euros over five years. The
annual budget of the National Assembly (533.9 million euros) will
therefore remain stable until 2012. This is despite the creation of two
new permanent committees (sustainable development, cultural affairs) and
that of an evaluation and control committee. The savings efforts affect
all areas. Real estate: the Assembly has purchased a building on rue Las
Cases housing the foreign and European affairs committees. The complete
renovation of the offices at 101, rue de l\'Université has also made it
possible to accommodate many deputies. The reimbursement of overnight
stays in the Saint-Dominique residence (formerly the Sofitel hotel) has
thus virtually disappeared. Total property costs have decreased by more
than 6 million euros per year. In the IT field, two million euros have
been saved thanks to the extension of free software, the spacing out of
hardware renewals, the reduction of telephone costs and the
dematerialization of documents. In terms of communication, 1.7 million
euros of savings have been generated on an overall budget of 3.9
million. In transport, expenditure has also fallen substantially due to
the elimination of first class for air travel by deputies on mission,
including for the President of the Assembly. One hundred and fifty
thousand euros of savings have also been made in the allocation of SNCF
cards. Finally, the vehicle fleet has been thoroughly combed, with the
use of less powerful vehicles. Between 1 January 2006 and 1 January
2010, the number of civil servants also fell by more than 2.5%, despite
greater security requirements. And the cost of the Parliament Congress
rose to 231,000 euros (for half a day), whereas it used to take place
over a full day, at a cost of 423,000 euros.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1087

\"What I like best about graffiti is tagging. It\'s the purest form of
graffiti, the most abundant, but also the most unloved,\" says American
hacker artist Evan Roth, who is passionate about these calligraphies,
express signatures scribbled on walls. And more precisely for what we
don\'t see, that is to say the furtive gesture of the tagger that he has
set out to capture. He himself is not a pro with the spray can, as he
readily admits. On the other hand, he skillfully handles computer code.
After studying architecture, followed by a thesis on \"Graffiti and
Technology\" at Parsons, the New York school of design, he co-founded
the Graffiti Research Lab, which would renew this urban art by
hybridizing it with technologies \"to make graffiti ever higher, ever
bigger.\" Among his inventions, the Throwies, LED lights coupled with
magnets and batteries that are thrown away and stuck to street
furniture, or the Laser Tag that allows monumental graffiti with laser
in public spaces. Evan Roth developed the first version of Graffiti
Analysis, his movement analyzer, in 2004. He spotted familiar tags
(Hell, Avone, Jesus Saves and Katsu) on his journeys and asked the four
graffiti artists to reproduce their signature with a marker topped with
a light, tracked by a camera. A software of his own collects, analyzes
and records the movement data, archived in a database 000000book.com,
free and open to all. Graffiti artists are invited to share their manual
style, which several stars such as Seen, Twist, Amaze and Jonone have
already done. An iPhone application also allows you to trace your own
tag with your finger and then send it to the archive which contains
10,000 3D animations. All tags created with the software are saved in a
new standard (Graffiti markup language) that is compatible with other
applications that Evan helped develop. For example, Eye Writer, a cheap,
open-source device that literally lets you write with your eyes, was
developed for TemptOne, a graffiti artist who suffers from amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis that leaves him completely paralyzed except for his
eyes. Thanks to Eye Writer, which won the Prix Ars electronica this
year, he was able to start tagging the city again from his hospital bed.
Developers are invited to create new applications and visualizations of
these movements. The artist Golan Levin used this data to have these
tags drawn by industrial robots, and Benjamin Gaulon used his Printball,
a robot armed with a paintball gun that shoots letters on the walls.
\"My goal is to bring together two communities that, each in their own
way, hack the system, whether in the code or the urban landscape,\"
explains Evan Roth. He also hopes to renew the tag by proposing
unexpected forms \"so that people can appreciate the beauty of these
calligraphies with a new eye\". At the Kunsthalle in Vienna, he has just
exhibited a 3D sculpture of a tag captured on the spot and materialized
with a 3D printer. \"A way of clandestinely bringing these illegal tags
into the museum.\" After the version 2.0 presented at the Fondation
Cartier in 2009, Evan Roth, who has since settled in Paris, is offering
this Saturday, for the closing of the Les grandes traversées festival in
Bordeaux, a version 3.0, with projected tags that are written on the
walls surrounded by a cloud of particles pulsating according to the
surrounding sounds and the structure of the buildings.
Http://evan-roth.com http://graffitianalysis.com www.eye-writer.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1088

The case was brought before the courts by defenders of free software
about two years ago. According to them, this practice was discriminatory
for free software solutions, which are the most likely to save the
government millions of dollars in recurring payments for user rights for
so-called proprietary software. \"After analyzing the judgment, we
decided to leave it at that,\" Sylvie Lebreux, spokesperson for the
Régie des rentes du Québec (RRQ), the organization at the heart of the
Quebec Superior Court\'s decision rendered on June 3, told Le Devoir
yesterday. The Régie had until last Monday to exercise its right to
appeal. \"We believe that all the players in this case acted in good
faith. We also take note of the positions and recommendations set out in
this judgment for the future.\" A month ago, Judge Denis Jacques ruled
that the RRQ had failed in its duty by awarding a \$723,000 contract to
Compugen, a Microsoft software distributor, to upgrade 800 workstations.
The Vista operating system, as well as the Visio and Office
applications, were at the heart of this transaction. For the Régie, only
these products could meet its needs, which exempted it from issuing a
call for tenders. This was an error, according to the judgment, which,
without cancelling the contract awarded, states that \"a call for
tenders would have allowed for competition between different suppliers
who could have proposed original solutions to meet the Régie\'s needs.\"
What\'s more, the Court also highlighted the government\'s inconsistency
in publicly acknowledging the economic and structural advantages of free
software through its Department of Government Services, but failing to
make room for it in its computer system. The decision of the Régie not
to drag out the legal proceedings was welcomed by Cyrille Béraud, of the
company Savoir Faire Linux, the man behind the lawsuit against the
government agency. \"The opposite would have been surprising,\" he said.
\"The judgment is to the advantage of the government. It is also an
important opening for free software and we must now look forward.\" All
over the world, these free software solutions are increasingly being
considered by public administrations to reduce their procurement bills
while ensuring greater independence from certain suppliers. The United
States, France and Brazil have also announced major changes in recent
months to integrate more of them into their digital landscape.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1089

Microsoft, Nokia, and to a lesser extent Intel: these three groups,
leaders in their market, are seeing their supremacy increasingly
threatened. By Google, by Apple, and more generally by the mobile
Internet revolution. Nokia The Finnish group still had a large market
share of 40% in mobile phones two years ago. And this included
smartphones, machines as powerful as mini-computers, capable of
connecting to the Internet. But the arrival of Apple\'s iPhone in June
2007 shook this colossus. The group took a long time before launching
its own touchscreen terminal. It has launched a number of mobile
services: a portal (Ovi), a musical content offering (musicMe), online
games, etc. Without success. Today, the group, which still sells more
than a million phones per day, has lost its technological leadership and
risks finding itself confined to manufacturing low-end terminals. A
formidable situation, because its financial margins would be crushed and
the brand would be exposed even more to the risks of counterfeiting.
Microsoft The American, the world\'s leading software publisher, still
equips nine out of ten computers in the world with operating systems
(the Windows range) and office software (the Office suite). But players
from the Internet, first and foremost Google, or supporters of free
software, which can be modified and used as desired, are attacking it
head-on on PC screens, with more basic but free products (the Chrome OS
operating system and Google Docs software). Furthermore, its mobile
phone operating system is failing to establish itself. Its market share
in high-end telephony has even fallen, dropping from 10.2% to 6.8% in
one year in the first quarter of 2010, according to Gartner. Many
criticize software that is literally inspired by Windows, not optimized
for mobile, and less ergonomic than that of the iPhone. \"Windows
phones\" continue to be popular with professionals, who find their work
\"environment\" there, but less so with the general public. Intel The
American group, the world\'s leading manufacturer of microprocessors, is
also one of the leaders in the \"PC platform\": around eight out of ten
machines are equipped with one of its chips. \"In the PC world, there is
a great deal of standardization of the different modules that make up
the machine: the processor, the operating system, etc. One company can
produce one component, a second another, a third assemble them. The
structure of the mobile market is completely different. Everything is
much more integrated,\" explains Sébastien Rospide, consultant for the
specialist firm Décision. Companies like Samsung and even Apple design
or even produce everything in-house (hardware, software, chip, etc.).
The American Qualcomm offers telephone manufacturers very specific
modules, combining the ability to connect the telephone to mobile
networks and the ability to run computer applications. Intel remains a
newcomer in this sector. But these three groups retain considerable
human and financial capacities: hundreds of engineers in research and
development or tens of billions of dollars that can be quickly
mobilized, in the case of Intel or Microsoft. They have no choice,
because it is the core of their businesses that is threatened. Intel is
focusing on energy savings to design semiconductors that are just as
powerful, but less power-hungry to meet one of the major constraints of
telephones: autonomy. Microsoft announced, for this fall, the
availability of its new operating system for mobile telephones,
\"Windows Mobile Seven\". Its engineers have chosen to focus on social
networks: the software offers a telephone where you \"surf\" from one
application to another via your different contacts (from a Facebook
profile to a Flickr account via a Twitter feed\...). An original
proposition, which would allow terminal manufacturers to distinguish
themselves from the iPhone. As for Nokia, its directors announced a
partnership with Intel to design operating systems (\"MeeGo\") for
digital tablets. Perhaps they will choose to cross the Rubicon,
abandoning their home-made operating system dedicated to phones,
Symbian, for Android, Google\'s, today the darling of independent
developers (along with the iPhone)? This would be the way to give their
terminals some new life.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1090

Find an Internet café, rent all the computers available for a few hours,
and present a net.art exhibition there. On June 11, the artist Aram
Bartholl organized the first Speed Show, an express exhibition in a
small Internet café in Kreuzberg, a trendy district of Berlin, where he
presented, on all the requisitioned stations, online works that could be
viewed on a simple web browser. Monopolies. The location is announced on
the Net at the last minute, like a techno Free party. From 9 p.m., more
than 150 people crowded into this improvised gallery under the
astonished gaze of the owners of the Internet café (also drinks
vendors), delighted by this unusual turnout. The first edition of the
Speed Show brought together a dozen artist-coders, open source activists
and other Web renegades. Net.art pioneers like Jodi, Olia Lialina and
Dragan Espenschied, who made the Internet their artistic medium in the
90s, rub shoulders with their worthy successors. The technical
difficulties, the low bandwidth and the novelty of the tool then
reserved this art for an avant-garde. Although declared dead in 1998 by
those who invented it, net.art still seems to have a bright future ahead
of it, revived by a new generation that multiplies interventions on
YouTube, criticizes social networks and their monopolies, while
celebrating pixels and html. \"Classic net.art is remixed with web
activism, the Do-it-Yourself philosophy, the culture of sharing, writes
Aram Bartholl who speaks of \"pop.net.art\" to designate this
resurgence, at a time when the Web has become an integral part of
people\'s lives and more and more amateurs are making creative use of
the network. Spearheading this pop trend is the FAT Lab (Free Art and
Technology), of which Aram Bartholl is a member, as well as Evan Roth,
who presents his Animated Gif Mash-Up, an open-source tool that allows
you to mix animated gifs with any music file. The Speed Show is
punctuated by Education of the Noobz\'s chipmusic, made on old Atari
STs, the code of which is freely downloadable. Constant Dullaart offers
his own \"agitated\" vision of current events with Nervous News, where
the BBC\'s web pages seem to be having an epileptic fit. The star of the
evening is the famous Web 2.0 Suicide Machine from the Moddr collective,
which allows you to sabotage your Twitter, Myspace and Facebook
accounts, which earned him an excommunicado from the number 1 social
network. \"Interloper.\" \"The problem with art on the Internet is how
to exhibit it,\" explains Bartholl. \"Today, we no longer need a gallery
or a museum. The screen at home is the window that allows access to
everything, including art. On the other hand, physical encounters are
more important than ever. Looking at a screen, alone at home, is boring.
The Internet café represents the Internet in a cheap, amateur, shady
way. Why not set up your own gallery there for a few hours.\" The artist
encourages everyone to take ownership of this fast, mobile and networked
format and to organize a Speed Show in the Internet café downstairs, to
present your work or that of your friends, while having a drink.
Http://fffff.at/speed-show-how-to/

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1091

\"I imagine that the world suddenly freezes. What would you do if you
had the opportunity to rebuild everything, reinvent everything?\" Ykon
Game, a board game imagined by the eponymous collective, is a remake of
Buckminster Fuller\'s World Game, developed in the 1960s. For the
American architect, inventor of the geodesic dome, the game was an ideal
tool for understanding and finding solutions to humanity\'s problems
(hunger, illiteracy, health, environment). Ykon Game is a contemporary
version, but rather than healing the wounds of the old world, it hopes
to inspire new ideas that could radically alter the course of things.
Invited by the Mal au pixel festival, the collective took over the Eof
gallery last Sunday, reproducing a giant planisphere on the ground.
Among the scenarios suggested by the participants, the general
\"reset\": databases, bank accounts, computer clocks are reset to zero
and new software installed that would take into account indicators based
not on GDP but on the degree of \"humanity\". Voltage drops. Mal au
pixel, the little Parisian brother of the Finnish festival Pixelache,
dedicated to electronic cultures, tackles environmental issues and
access to technologies. Spread across a dozen locations, this fifth
edition summons \"non-Western perspectives\" on these issues, by
inviting artists from Asia, Africa, and Latin America. Adepts of
recycling, they tinker with the tools at hand, favoring low-tech and the
sharing of knowledge. Faced with daily power cuts, Jean Katambayi
Mukendi imagined a cardboard prototype stuffed with electronics that
allows these voltage drops to be visualized. \"I am myself a victim of
these sudden variations due to the anarchic exploitation of the
electrical network in the Republic of Congo, the galloping demography in
the cities where everyone connects to the device,\" says the artist
whose sculpture was blocked for two days by customs, not very sensitive
to his art, who considered that the electrical device did not meet NF
standards. Bombay artists Ashok Sukumaran and Shaina Anand imagine new
uses of the media for local populations, documented at the BenJ gallery.
They divert a surveillance camera in East Jerusalem to put it in the
hands of Palestinian residents. In New Delhi, they connect televisions
and cheap surveillance equipment to create a local communication
network. In a market in Dakar, they organize radio microphone sessions
using an antenna, 15 transistors and a car battery. Same \"do it
yourself\" credo in the Re:farm the City project, which aims to allow
the average person to create their own apartment vegetable garden. For
five days, in the Mycroft gallery under construction, these electronic
gardeners from Spain, Argentina and Portugal, are leading a workshop to
create a mobile farm installed in old suitcases picked up in the street,
develop their own electronic tools to control humidity, light,
temperature and maintain crops remotely when you go on vacation. Urban
farmers. The project is Opensource, all the instructions are online, the
ultimate goal being to encourage the production and consumption of local
products. The community of urban farmers is spreading to New York,
Madrid, Barcelona, Buenos Aires and now Paris. They will present their
project on Saturday at the CentQuatre, during a seminar on Hacklabs,
places of creation between art, science and citizenship. While you\'re
growing your strawberries, you might as well print your own vinyl
records too. At the Nuit d\'encre gallery, Yuri Suzuki has set up an
amateur recording studio that looks like a kitchen. The artist records
Dubplates live with local music groups, makes a mold and then presses a
disc from colored melted plastic. The sound is a little dirty, but when
you get tired of the disc, you just put it in the oven and print a new
one. In an even lower-def version, Gaël Angelis presents at Ars Longa
his fragile phonographs made entirely of paper. On the warped
scratchcard discs, dug with grooves, wanders a needle amplified with the
help of spitting horns. Sound performances that are at the heart of the
festival\'s rich musical program, with this evening at the Java an
explosive poster lining up Scorpion Violente and his synthetic nihilism,
the twisted electro nursery rhymes of Niwouinwouin, the Harsh noise of
Fred Nippi or the dada rock\'n\'roll of Elvis Trauma Center.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1092

SAN FRANCISCO --- (AP) Flock, a Web browser that emphasizes social
networking, wants to make it easier and faster to see what friends and
family are up to. The browser was updated this week using open-source
code built by Google for its Chrome browser, which has been used by
millions since its launch in 2008, largely because of its speed. Google
also became Flock's default search engine. Flock previously ran on the
same platform as Mozilla's Firefox, the second-most-used browser behind
Microsoft's Internet Explorer. About 17 million people have downloaded
previous versions of Flock in the past five years, putting it well
behind Explorer, Firefox, Chrome, Safari and Opera. Flock President
Shawn Hardin hopes the update will help the browser reach 70 million
downloads within the next year. In addition to loading websites faster,
the new version of Flock includes tools that will allow users to check
their social networks without having to hop from site to site. The
\"What Your Friends Say\" tool offers search results from a user\'s
friend groups on popular sites like Facebook, Twitter and YouTube. For
example, searching for \"oil spill\" or \"smart phones\" will bring up
the latest comments on those topics from a person\'s network of friends.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1093

SOFTWARE Three years after Google, Microsoft, in turn, offers the
general public the possibility of using a light version of Office, its
office software suite, for free via the Internet. An option offered at
the same time as Office 2010, the new paid version of its \"bouquet\" of
software (Word, Excel, Power Point, etc.) present on a billion computers
worldwide. Is the giant ready to deprive itself of part of Office sales
to better compete against Google or even open source solutions? \"We are
betting that Office Web Apps, the light and free version of the suite
accessible on the Internet, will facilitate the sharing and use of
Office on the move,\" explains Jean-Christophe Pitié, director of
Microsoft\'s Office division in France. Thanks to a simple Windows Live
address, all users will be able to exchange and share documents by
connecting to the Web wherever they are, which will give them access to
these tools.\" They will also have 25 gigabytes of storage space. This
service will be financed by advertising, Microsoft emphasizes. In fact,
it will be advertising for its own products. Sales erosion The leaders
of the Redmond group are convinced that free applications will be a
complement to the paid use of Office. \"If we want to create content
with video, 3D and graphic effects, the light version will not be
enough,\" adds Jean-Christophe Pitié. Videos, slideshows, tables\... The
creation of documents and content has been made easier so that amateurs
can improvise as \"pros\". Financially, Microsoft has an interest in
making this bet a good one. In the third quarter of 2010, which ended on
March 31, Microsoft Business Division, the branch that hosts Office -
90% of its turnover - saw its sales erode compared to last year. It went
from 4.5 to 4.2 billion dollars, while its operating profit fell from
2.7 to 2.6 billion dollars for the first quarter of the year. In France,
however, Jean-Christophe Pitié observed good performances. Sales of
Office to the general public have tripled in three years. But the
general public brings in much less: the family and student license for a
computer costs only 99 euros, while the license for a professional
reaches 499 euros for a workstation and climbs to 699 euros for three
workstations. At the same time, Google Apps are doing well: 25 million
people use it and a million of them have subscribed to its paid version
which costs 40 euros per user per year. An activity still marginal for
the leading online advertising agency.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1094

This is one of the major launches of 2010 for Microsoft. On Tuesday,
June 15, the American group launched the latest version of its Office
suite worldwide, called Office 2010 for the general public. For the
world\'s leading software publisher, the stakes are high. Comprised of
the Word word processor, the Excel spreadsheet, the PowerPoint slideshow
software and the OneNote note-taking tool, Office is by far the most
widely used office suite in the world. Nearly a billion PCs are equipped
with it. Above all, it accounts for a third of the group\'s turnover
(\$18.9 billion or €15.5 billion) and more than half of its operating
income (\$12 billion). The group\'s other \"cash cow\" is the Windows
operating system for computers. Microsoft owes its exceptional
profitability to Office and Windows: for its fiscal year ending June
2009, the publisher made a net profit of 14.5 billion dollars, more than
the GDP of Gabon or Guinea\... Increasingly competitive The big news in
Office 2010 is that for the first time, Microsoft is offering a Web
version of its product, albeit simplified, but free. From any computer
with an Internet connection, it will be possible, even if you have not
previously purchased Office 2010 (which costs at least 99 euros), to
create or modify Word, Excel, etc. documents. And also to store up to 25
gigabytes of documents (the equivalent of thousands of Word files).
\"You will also be able to access them via your multimedia phone. This
offer is complementary to the use of Office on your PC,\" explains
Jean-Christophe Pitié, director of the Office division at Microsoft
France. A timid but radical change in the economic model. With Office
Web, the online version, the group plans to make money by selling
advertisements, which will \"a priori only be visible in the storage
space\", specifies Mr. Pitié. \"There is obviously a risk of
cannibalization of the paid version by the free version\", estimates
Mathieu Poujol of the Pierre Audoin Consultants firm. But does the
American group have a choice? As with Windows, still dominant but
increasingly challenged by free or less expensive software (Linux,
Google Chrome OS), Office must deal with new, more competitive products.
Like Google Docs, a suite accessible on the Web, published by Google, or
the OpenOffice.org project, based on free software, supported by IBM,
Oracle and independent developers. Dominant position These software
programs are more basic, but their designers are betting on all those,
especially in the general public, who do not need all the features of
Office for their daily use. \"Some, particularly government departments,
choose us to escape Microsoft\'s influence,\" says Charles-Henri Schulz,
a member of the OpenOffice.org community council. Microsoft\'s dominant
position does not seem to be under threat in the short term, however.
\"Google Docs is not widely used in businesses,\" says Mr. Poujol. The
third version of OpenOffice.org, released in 2009, has been downloaded
154 million times. \"Microsoft is still very strong. Its salespeople are
capable of slashing their prices to keep a customer,\" he says. \"If it
is threatened, it is more by the possible end of the omnipotence of the
PC,\" adds the specialist, referring to the successful launch of
Apple\'s iPad and the enormous success of phones permanently connected
to the Internet. In fact, Microsoft built its success on the PC
\"platform.\" However, the American giant is currently struggling to
establish itself on mobile phones. The market share of Windows Mobile,
its operating system for multimedia phones, fell to 6.8% in the first
quarter of 2010, from 10.2% a year earlier, according to Gartner Group.
And the publisher has still not publicly announced a product dedicated
to tablets.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1095

To manage an increasingly large and complex network, ZAP Québec and
other community wireless organizations need effective tools that don\'t
cost a fortune. And thanks to open source software, they work wonders.
The software used throughout Quebec by the six member organizations of
the Alliance communautaire du sans-fil (CSF) is called WIFIDog (the
wireless dog). It was initially created by members of Île sans fil, the
Montreal community access network, and was later modified by other
organizations in Quebec, Ontario, England and Germany. WIFIDog is used
to create user accounts. The software starts up as soon as a user
connects, and it keeps statistics on network usage. \"We don\'t want to
know which sites users go to,\" emphasizes Mario Asselin, spokesperson
for ZAP Québec. \"We simply want to evaluate the level of use of the
accounts to ensure that it remains a start-up service. If someone abuses
\[\...\], we can disconnect them, but that has almost never happened.\"
With the expansion of networks, WIFIDog is reaching its limits, he
thinks. \"We patched it up as our networks grew, but we can\'t do that
forever, it ends up becoming too heavy. We are now thinking of creating
a new product, which is currently called Authpuppy.\" All the groups
have pooled funds, and a lot of volunteer work. We hope to arrive in the
fall with this replacement for WIFIDog, which has reached the end of its
useful life. \"We decided to create something new, and other groups
around the world who are watching us will be able to use what we
created, and perhaps improve it. That\'s the beauty of open source
software.\" The same thing happened with another tool developed in
Quebec City. \"There came a point where we lacked the arguments to
convince organizations to install a terminal \[\...\] in their homes. So
we had the idea of creating a site where citizens could request a ZAP at
a location of their choice. That\'s how we were able to demonstrate that
there was a strong demand to connect the Plains.\" The tool is called
moijezap.org, and the other members of the Wireless Community Alliance
took note. \"The other regions saw our tool, and since we work in open
source mode, Montreal and Sherbrooke didn\'t have to pay to use what we
had developed. We shared the code with them.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1096

Marie Malavoy, Official Opposition Critic for Research and Development
and Technological Innovations, will have the opportunity today to
present, at the Bureau of the National Assembly, a project aimed at
testing free software on Parliament Hill. The Bureau is made up of a few
MNAs, including the Speaker of the National Assembly, the Chief
Government Whip and the Official Opposition Whip. \"I asked to meet with
them to present a document that presents free software, explains its
advantages, and reports on some successful experiments elsewhere in the
world,\" she said in an interview with Le Soleil. This week is a pivotal
moment, explains the PQ MNA for Taillon. On the one hand, a recent
Superior Court judgment opened the door to free software by stating that
the government must use calls for tenders when replacing operating
systems or office suites. On the other hand, this is the last meeting of
the Bureau before the end of the session. \"I don\'t expect the Bureau
to make a commitment at this point,\" she said, \"but I would like to
see at least a small working committee created, with people who know
about free software, to look at the possibility of testing it.\" Such a
project would not put Quebec on the sidelines of technological
development, quite the contrary, she said. \"There is a vast movement
around the world toward the use of free software, and Quebec must
participate. The National Assembly is small compared to the Quebec
government, but if this project were successful, it could help move
things forward.\" Furthermore, she added, the Parti Québécois intends to
put pressure on the government to prevent it from appealing the Superior
Court\'s judgment and to change its practices for the future.
passelin@lesoleil.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1097

It\'s all well and good to criticize Facebook, but we still need to be
able to find alternatives. And at that level, we feel bad for admitting
that inspiration is almost lacking. Go back to MySpace? And why not
listen to the Spice Girls in baggy jeans again, while we\'re at it. More
seriously, the old refrain of the extreme right \"you love it or you
leave it\" would be hard to apply to the social network. A more
realistic formula would be \"you love it or you improve it\". This is
the whole point of the American researcher specializing in social
networks and employed by Microsoft, Danah Boyd, often critical of the
site, who published a post on her blog in May entitled Leaving Facebook
is useless: encouraging it to improve is not. Boyd believes that privacy
disputes are not sufficient reasons to cause a mass exodus from the
social network and only concern a minority, a sort of slightly snobbish
technophile elite. The growing number of users and the relatively low
participation in the \"Quit Facebook Day\" on May 31, despite
significant media coverage, tend to support her point. The specialist,
who mentions the \"very, very, very deep\" relationship between the
network and most of its members, uses her own little comparison to
justify the inaction of users who do not always agree with the site\'s
policy: \"It\'s like saying that people should leave their apartment
because they don\'t get along with their landlord, or that they should
dump their spouse because of a decision that was poorly perceived.\"
Zahia D. For Boyd, the main concern remains the clear ignorance of
ordinary people on Facebook, who are not or barely aware of the
consequences of certain publications, or of the processes used to make
them inaccessible to the entire Web. However, simple tools exist to dot
the i\'s and cross the t\'s. For example, the Reclaim Privacy tool
allows you to \"test\" the confidentiality of your Facebook profile in a
simple, quick and effective way: using a simple colour code (green for
secure, red for risky), the user will know in ten seconds whether some
of their data is accessible to a slightly too wide sphere. And thus
avoid disappointments like the one experienced by a certain Zahia D., a
pleasant young girl well known to certain footballers. On 21 April, the
website of Le Monde quoted her first name and the initial of her last
name in an article concerning the sex scandal. In a few minutes,
Internet users found her profile by rummaging through the Facebook
contacts of the alleged intermediary between the Blues and the young
lady. Her profile is not private and her personal photos will thus be
all over the Internet in half a day. Will salvation come from the free
software community? Riding on the discontent, an initiative soberly
named \"Diaspora\" has been making headlines for several weeks. Control.
Financed by patron Internet users, the future site aims to be an
Opensource alternative to Mark Zuckerberg\'s network, where everyone
will keep control of their personal data that will not end up stored on
a computer server in California. The project is led by four students at
New York University, who presented their objectives in a video that
almost verges on geek self-caricature. No reason to doubt their
motivation or their talent, but no reason to worry the giant Facebook
either. The height of irony is that Zuckerberg recently announced that
he had invested a few dollars in the project. Personal information that
he could have kept to himself, but the PR is well worth an unpacking of
private life.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1098

It is unfortunate, but not surprising given how dominant Microsoft is in
the government machine, that common sense has not led the government to
adopt free software on its own, as many administrations around the world
have done. Is it not time now to break the de facto monopoly that
Microsoft exercises on software installed on PCs purchased by ordinary
people? Why, in fact, should the Office of Consumer Protection not
require PC distributors to offer a choice of free operating system
instead of Windows? The free option could save consumers money. \*\*\*
Denis L\'Homme - Lévis, June 4, 2010

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1099

This victory won by Savoir-faire Linux at the expense of the Microsoft
software monopoly and its \"Microsoft certified\" apostles is excellent
news for free software enthusiasts. It is also excellent news for the
Quebec taxpayer since it will allow the government and its agencies -
perhaps against their will - to substantially reduce their office
automation budget without losing computer functionality. It is
regrettable, but not surprising when we know how dominant Microsoft is
in the government machine, that simple common sense has not led the
government to adopt free software of its own accord as many
administrations around the world have done. Is it not time, now, to
break the de facto monopoly that Microsoft exercises on software
installed on PCs purchased by Mr. and Mrs. Average? Why, indeed, should
the Office of Consumer Protection not require PC distributors to offer a
choice of free operating system instead of Windows? The free option
could save consumers money. Denis L\'Homme Lévis

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1100

(TM) The PQ and ADQ opposition urged the government not to appeal a
recent Superior Court decision that would open the way to the use of
free software in the public service. This week, Savoir-Faire Linux (SFL)
won its case before the Régie des rentes du Québec and the Centre de
services partagés du Québec. \"The Superior Court would save taxpayers
tens of millions of dollars (\...). In February 2008, the Régie awarded
a \$700,000 contract for the renewal of computer workstations without a
call for tenders. There is a Quebec company, SFL, that is contesting it
because it was unable to submit a bid with another computer system
called free software,\" said ADQ leader Gérard Deltell yesterday during
question period. The same story was echoed by PQ member Marie Malavoy.
According to her analysis, Quebec \"knows that they (free software) are
more flexible, more efficient and less expensive. Despite everything,
this government is covering its ears and closing its eyes and does not
want to hear anything about free software.\" Extremely cautious, the
Minister of Government Services, Dominique Vien, simply said that \"we
take note (of the judgment). We are analyzing it and we will see what
happens next.\" The legal appeal period is 30 days.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1101

In the process, the court also highlights the inconsistency of the
government which, while recognizing the economic and structural
advantages of open source software to ensure the sustainability and
flexibility of its computer equipment, struggles to make room for this
technology in its contract awarding process, and this, to the benefit of
multinational proprietary software companies associated with costly
\"exclusive licensing rights.\" Defenders of free applications applaud.
\"This is a very good decision for us,\" Cyrille Béraud, president of
Savoir-Faire Linux, a company that promotes free software and which has
decided to challenge the validity of the contract awarded to Microsoft
by the RRQ, told Le Devoir yesterday. \"But it is also a great victory
for the Quebec government which, with this judgment, now has a tool to
free itself from the stranglehold of multinationals on its information
system.\" In his forty-page judgment handed down yesterday, Judge Denis
Jacques believes that the RRQ failed in its duty by awarding a \$722,848
contract to Compugen, a distributor of Microsoft products, to update its
workstations. For the Régie, only one supplier, the American
multinational, could meet its IT needs and, in this context, the
Regulation respecting supply, construction and service contracts of
government departments and public bodies therefore allowed it to award
this contract worth more than \$25,000 without a competitive bidding
process. A misreading, says the Superior Court, which ultimately rules
that the Régie did not prove that no other system could serve its
digital interests before signing the cheque. \"The Court considers that
a call for tenders would have allowed for competition between different
suppliers who could have proposed original solutions to meet the needs
of the Régie,\" wrote the judge, who nevertheless decided not to cancel
the award of the contract, but made this award process illegal for the
future. \"This is a judgment that will set a precedent,\" commented Mr.
Béraud, who has been fighting for years against Microsoft\'s monopoly in
public administration equipment. According to him, free software, whose
great ambassador throughout the world is the open-access operating
system called Linux, could lead to significant savings for governments.
Its applications, which can be downloaded free of charge, can also be
used without paying royalties. Their computer code is also open, which
allows everyone to manipulate and shape them according to specific
needs, with the key being greater independence from certain suppliers.
Better still, these \"free software programs offer great potential in
terms of information security and protection of citizens\' privacy,\"
according to the Ministry of Government Services in a document presented
on its website, as Judge Denis Jacques points out in his verdict. In the
United States, the Obama administration has decided to make more room
for this type of software in government computers in the future. France
and Brazil have also expressed their intention in recent months to
introduce more free software into government computer equipment. \"These
are programs that guarantee equitable access to technology in addition
to contributing to the sustainable development of information systems,\"
says Mr. Béraud. Free software is ultimately a matter of public
interest, it is not just a technical matter.\" Contacted by Le Devoir,
Herman Huot, spokesperson for the RRQ, indicated yesterday that the
Régie would \"take note of the judgment and its consequences for
\[it\]\" before taking part in the commentary game. The organization has
30 days to appeal the case, an option \"that could certainly be
considered,\" he said. However, this scenario would be absurd, according
to Mr. Béraud, represented in this case by the famous lawyer Julius
Grey, among others: \"The Quebec government is not going to appeal a
judgment that now strengthens its ability to enter the 21st century and
modernize,\" he summarized.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1102

The Régie des rentes du Québec (RRQ) acted illegally in February 2008
when it acquired Microsoft software without conducting a call for
tenders, concluded Superior Court Justice Denis Jacques. In a lengthy
judgment of some forty pages, the judge ruled in full favor of the
company Savoir-Faire Linux (SFL), which initiated this lawsuit against
the RRQ and the Centre de services partagés du Québec. \"The primary
beneficiary of this judgment is the Quebec government, which is freed
from the grip of multinationals,\" declared SFL President Cyrille Béraud
yesterday. \"All I gained was the right to be compared to others in a
free and competitive market.\" SFL had filed this lawsuit after being
refused authorization by the Régie to submit a proposal based on the
Linux system, when acquiring operating systems and office suites for 500
workstations. Simple upgrade? Before the court, the Centre de services
partagés du Québec argued that the Régie was only carrying out an
\"upgrade\" of its workstations, to justify its decision to stick with
Microsoft products, in particular the Vista operating system and the
Office 2007 suite. The judge did not agree, since the RRQ was replacing
the Windows XP system and the Office 2000 suite. \"This is a migration,
a renewal of its computer equipment. \[\...\] If such a major change
constituted an upgrade, everything would become an upgrade, making the
call for tenders rule inapplicable.\" The judge also cites email
exchanges between RRQ employees, which he believes show improvisation
and bias toward Microsoft solutions. \"Give me arguments to justify each
product, everything that comes to mind\...\" wrote one employee, a
comment that speaks volumes about the lack of serious and documented
research, the judge concluded. \"I would like a CGI expert on free
software to comment on the response we sent \[to Cyrille Béraud\]. Are
the arguments valid? \[\...\] I would like our comments to remain
CONFIDENTIAL,\" the same employee asked later. An approach that
surprised even the people at CGI. \"I thought the goal was to compare
the two solutions,\" wrote the specialist approached by the Régie.
\"However, this is a request to confirm that Linux - OpenOffice is not
in the game. It would be paradoxical to make such a finding when we are
promoting the opposite\...\" This exchange, wrote the judge,
\"demonstrates the spirit in which the Régie operates to bypass its
obligation to proceed by call for tenders\...\". He also notes the
RRQ\'s decision to publish its notice of intent in the middle of the
Christmas period, on December 21, 2007, requiring that any interested
party submit their comments before January 11, 2008. \"Unfortunately for
the Régie\'s \"strategy\", Mr. Béraud responded on December 25, 2007,\"
recalled Judge Jacques. The judge considered that it would be
unreasonable to retroactively cancel the transaction concluded in 2008,
but he nevertheless considered it \"fair and necessary\" to declare that
the Régie acted illegally by proceeding with this acquisition without
serious and documented research. He concluded that it could not award
this contract without a call for tenders. The Régie\'s spokesperson,
Herman Huot, indicated yesterday that the organization was giving itself
a few days to study the decision. As for the president of SFL, he
explained that his approach \"was not intended to annoy the RRQ or
anyone else. We wanted to highlight the fact that we were falling behind
technologically. I hope that, since this is only a declaratory judgment,
the State will not appeal it.\" \"We could not have hoped for better,\"
he added. \"I would like to take this opportunity to launch a solemn
appeal to the political parties and the Charest government to address
the issue of free software. Free software means technological
independence, local jobs, less expensive and more efficient information
systems.\" passelin@lesoleil.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1103

QUEBEC - In an important judgment, the Superior Court of Quebec ruled
yesterday that the government is required to issue public calls for
tenders for the purchase of software licenses, even if it believes that
only one company can meet its expectations. In his judgment, Judge Denis
Jacques established that the Régie des rentes du Québec did not have the
right to directly grant Microsoft the mandate to renew licenses for its
employees\' workstations. The RRQ was then switching from Windows XP to
Vista and adding licenses for Visio and Office, two other products of
the American multinational. \"This is an important judgment for the
future of Quebec,\" declared Cyrille Béraud yesterday, head of
Savoir-faire Linux, the firm that took the RRQ to court. The computer
scientist believes that this decision will free the government and
Quebec public companies from the grip of multinationals. The RRQ case
may seem marginal since the Crown corporation only purchased \$700,000
worth of software. It can be estimated that each year, departments
purchase \$100 million worth of software without a call for tenders. The
Régie des rentes was laconic: \"We have just received this judgment. We
intend to read it before commenting on it,\" said Herman Huot, the
organization\'s spokesperson. In his verdict, Judge Jacques established
that the Régie \"acted illegally in the fall of 2006 by choosing a
supplier, Microsoft (\...) in the absence of serious research (\...)
based on the required specifications and in the absence of a public
notice.\" Mr. Béraud believes that the Court is opening the door wide to
\"free software,\" a formula that is infinitely less expensive than the
products of multinationals.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1104

It was the Internship and Placement Service, in conjunction with its
partner SMA/Technologies et solutions d\'apprentissage, that won an
award for its Individual Development Plan (IDP), a computer tool for
students who do internships in companies during their university
studies. It should be noted that the Université de Sherbrooke has earned
an enviable reputation in the field of internships, thanks to its
cooperative system that allows students to alternate between classroom
studies and paid internships in companies during their university
education. Year after year, approximately 4,000 internships are
organized in this way. Of course, the interns are not left to their own
devices, and the university has set up a supervision system that
includes an internship coordinator assigned to the incumbent, company
visits and meetings with the employer, as well as evaluation reports.
The IDP does not replace this supervision, but it reinforces and, above
all, refines it. "The Individual Development Plan is a specialized
software that the student accesses via the Internet using a password,"
explains Denis-Robert Elias, Director of the Internship and Placement
Service. "First, the student must fill out a technical sheet in which he
describes the environment of his internship and his perception of it. He
must also set goals. The software offers him an exercise to do each
week. Then, the PDI asks him to self-evaluate according to 16 skills,
three of which, according to his choice, will become his priorities. A
logbook allows the intern to record his observations and ideas at any
time." The beauty of it is that the internship coordinator and the
employer also have access to the student's PDI. They can therefore
follow the evolution of the intern's thinking and even comment on it.
"This virtually creates permanent contact between the student, the
coordinator and the employer, regardless of the location of the
internship." The other significant advantage is that the PDI requires
students to reflect and allows them to better evaluate themselves
throughout the internship. \"It\'s a great tool for reflection. At
first, students may find the exercise tedious, but at the end of the
internship, they all tell us that the PDI allowed them to get to know
themselves better.\" The PDI also allows students to better prepare for
the workplace. \"We built the software based on the same principles that
guide talent and skills management software used in large companies. We
want our young students to learn to behave like young professionals and
to be able to ask the right questions and then act accordingly. The PDI
allows us to strengthen this part of learning a profession. In my
opinion, it is the second generation of internships.\" A team of seven
students from the Faculty of Engineering won the Octas Prize in the
\"Student Emerging Talent\" category for their computer glove project,
the Glovus 3. \"It was our final bachelor\'s degree project,\" explains
Denis Bellavance, one of the members of this team from computer
engineering and electrical engineering. The challenge this team set
itself was to create a new interface between humans and computers that
would not involve a mouse or keyboard. The answer was the Glovus 3
computer glove. \"It\'s the movement you make while wearing the glove
that gives the computer commands. For example, bending a finger can
correspond to a mouse click. We also had to make the glove easy to use
and compatible with several software programs.\" The first step was to
design the computer glove, which includes 13 sensors made up of
accelerometers and gyrometers, capable of measuring the movements you
make with the glove. The data is then transmitted to the computer via
the Bluetooth wireless network. \"Then there was the acquisition phase
during which, by repeating a gesture or movement, the computer found the
characteristics of this movement, in order to then be able to recognize
it without error.\" Once the acquisition phase was complete, the next
step consisted of associating a specific action with the movement. \"The
user is free to choose the action they want and associate it with a
specific movement, according to their needs.\" Denis Bellavance\'s team
chose to test the Glovus 3 with music software, such as Garage Band or
even the game Guitar Hero. \"We therefore associated the movements of
the glove with musical actions. The flexion of a finger could
correspond, for example, to an A sharp. We made the movement and the
computer produced the note.\" It was therefore possible to make music by
moving the gloved hand. \"With the game Guitar Hero, it\'s almost like
air guitar hero that we were doing.\" Could this computer glove have new
applications? \"It\'s possible, but we haven\'t tried to market it. For
us, it was a student project. However, we developed this project using
open source code, so others may want to push it further,\" concludes
Denis Bellavance, now employed by Amazon in Seattle. \*\*\* Contributor
to Le Devoir

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1105

IT This is a new blow for Microsoft. According to yesterday\'s Financial
Times, Google employees have been asked since January to abandon
Windows, the Microsoft operating system that runs their computers.
Employees of the Californian Internet giant interviewed by the business
daily explain that management invoked the vulnerability of Windows in
the security domain. Indeed, Google had revealed last January that it
was the victim of a vast computer hacking operation orchestrated from
China. And the investigation had shown that the flaw came from Internet
Explorer (IE), Microsoft\'s Internet browser. The software publisher had
admitted that one of the versions of IE presented risks but only when it
was used with Windows 2000 and Windows XP. A security \"patch\" had then
been produced by Microsoft. For Google, this event was an opportunity to
review its IT strategy. Now, the management of the famous search engine
is offering its employees the choice of Mac OS, Apple\'s operating
system, or of switching to open-source Linux. Employees who want to stay
on Windows need permission from their superiors, and those who want to
buy a new machine running Windows must submit to the approval of
Google\'s technical director, reports the Financial Times. A series of
exchanges of words Financially, the loss of 10,000 users - the total
number of employees at Google worldwide - is not a big deal. The amount
paid by Google for Microsoft\'s licenses should not exceed three million
dollars for three years. But this gesture is significant. It adds to a
series of exchanges of words between the two giants of new technologies.
Google, which did not threaten Microsoft when it was content to be a
search engine, has become a competitor in many areas: it publishes
office software and Android, its operating system, now equips mobile
phones. Google has also launched Chrome, its own Internet browser, and
Chrome OS, its computer operating system, should soon be available on
Acer machines. For its part, Microsoft has become a heavyweight on the
Web. And its alliance with Yahoo! should allow it to better compete with
Google. However, this news makes one person happy: Apple, whose market
capitalization is neck and neck with that of Microsoft.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1106

The cream of innovators in music, art, cinema, design, architecture,
video games, nothing less\... This is the stated ambition of the site
The Creators Project, which is redrawing, in a few clicks, the world map
of culture, Vice-style. At the controls, Vice, an irreverent fanzine
created in 2004 in Montreal, which has become a media empire present in
more than 20 countries. At the purse strings, the microprocessor giant
Intel, in need of pop legitimacy, which is thumbing its nose at Apple in
the process. A strange coupling whose common denominator is the marriage
between creativity and technology. Shane Smith, co-founder of Vice, says
he wants to launch \"something inspired by the Parisian salons of the
1920s\" where artists, writers, and musicians converged to exchange
ideas. The Creators Project hopes to become the hub of digital creation,
to bring together tomorrow\'s talents, to break down barriers between
disciplines, and to stimulate collaborations between artists. The
project is being rolled out online but also physically, during a series
of events combining installations, screenings, conferences and musical
fiestas around the world. The first takes place at Milk Studios in New
York on June 26, before making a detour to the Old Continent (London on
July 17) but is mainly looking towards emerging scenes (and their
markets), Brazil (São Paulo on August 14), South Korea (Seoul on August
28) and Beijing where the grand finale will take place, from September
17 to 19. For the moment, it is difficult to see how these events will
be different from any other electronic arts festival. The casting, in
any case, is impressive and does not lack flair. Among the 84 artists in
the stable, there are a few emblematic pioneers (Laurent Garnier, Stefan
Sagmeister, Spike Jonze, Richie Hawtin, Chris Cunningham, etc.), but
above all the rising generation \"in independent cinema, futuristic
architecture, avant-garde electronic music and fashion\" according to
the press release. The site is gradually revealing videos presenting the
work of its protégés, including the Korean Hojun Song, who wants to
launch his own open source satellite, the Chinese Ray Lei and his pretty
hand-drawn animations, the hypnotic light architectures of the Brazilian
Muti Randolph, the clips of Radical Friend, the paper dresses of Jum
Nakao or the impressive interactive installations of the London
collective UVA Côté Frenchy: the director Ladj Ly of Kourtrajmé, the
Versaillais of Phoenix, the collective Exyzt\... Each interview is also
an opportunity to detail the software used, the brands of computer
hardware, and to say how cool technology is. Vice itself is a descendant
of the digital revolution. \"Vice started basically when idiots were
allowed to publish,\" Shane Smith told Wired. \"Technology allowed us to
launch our own magazine, then our own WebTV, VBS, thanks to editing
tools, cameras, and cheap software. Technology has always been at the
heart of what we do.\" Vice has also recently launched another news
platform that pleasantly mixes electronic cultures, Motherboard.tv,
sponsored by Dell this time. Www.thecreatorsproject.com www.viceland.com
www.vbs.tv www.motherboard.tv

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1107

DNA, deoxyribonucleic acid, whose double helix structure was described
by Crick and Watson in 1953, is indeed a macromolecule that can do
everything. As a carrier of heredity of course, and of the information
necessary for the development and functioning of an organism. But the
tools developed by biologists to synthesize tailor-made fragments at
will have also given ideas to chemists and physicists keen on
nanotechnologies. In 1994, Leonard Adleman was the first to propose the
use of DNA strands to solve a problem called the traveling salesman
problem, which consists of determining the smallest route connecting
several points and passing through each one only once. He thus paved the
way for future molecular computers, capable of performing complex
combinatorial calculations \"in a test tube\". Since then, DNA logic
gates, mimicking the operation of electronic circuits on silicon, have
been designed. Moreover, since the early 1990s, some people have
imagined being able to take advantage of the ability of DNA fragments to
attach to each other to create two-dimensional, and soon
three-dimensional, structures - such as cubes or truncated octahedrons.
But the synthesis of such objects required multiple steps and had a low
yield. More recently, the technique known as DNA origami has emerged.
This time, it involves synthesizing not several but a single strand of
DNA, whose folding points and local affinities have been previously
predicted so that it takes the desired shape. Indeed, the DNA molecule
is made up of four basic building blocks A, T, C and G: adenine, which
binds by complementarity to thymine and cytosine to guanine. Among the
first, in 2006, Paul Rothemund (Caltech, Pasadena) thus designed a wide
variety of planar structures, taking advantage of these elective
affinities. Since then, the synthesis of these origami has been refined
and it is now possible to design three-dimensional objects, such as
those that illustrate this page, designed in 2009 by William Shih\'s
team (Harvard University). This laboratory has even developed free
computer-aided design software, caDNAno. To obtain such self-assemblies,
DNA currently has \"no competitors\", judges Christophe Vieu, from the
Laboratory of Analysis and Architecture of Systems (CNRS, Toulouse). The
challenge now is to find a use for these inert structures, in chemistry,
pharmacy or even electronics.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1108

\"The only thing the government should do today \[yesterday\] is tell us
right now that it is giving up appealing and that it is taking note of
the judgment,\" Marie Malavoy of the Parti Québécois said in the House
yesterday. \"This judgment opens the door to tens of millions of dollars
in savings,\" said Gérard Deltel, leader of the Action démocratique du
Québec (ADQ), while asking Quebec to seize this opportunity rather than
\"contesting and making Quebecers pay even more.\" On Thursday, after
several years of proceedings, Judge Denis Jacques indicated that the
purchase of Microsoft software by the RRQ for an amount of \$722,000 was
illegal since no call for tenders had been issued and the Régie had not
been able to prove that no other solution could be considered. The RRQ
was taken to court by the company Savoir-faire Linux, which denounced
the awarding of this type of contract without a call for tender,
specifying that free software, these applications that can be downloaded
for free and with open source code, could meet the needs of the
organization at a lower cost. The government has until July 3 to appeal.
Questioned in the House by the opposition, Dominique Vien, Minister of
Government Services, refused to comment on the fate that Quebec reserves
for this judgment. \"We acknowledge it, we are analyzing it and we will
see what happens next,\" she indicated.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1109

The association that promotes free software in Quebec, FACIL, will not
have to pay the \$107,000 that the law firm Tremblay, Bois, Mignault was
claiming. The court registry instead assessed the amounts owed to the
lawyers who represented the Centre de services partagés du Québec (CSPQ)
in a case that FACIL lost, where the organization contested the CSPQ\'s
method of awarding software purchasing contracts, at \$465. Me Claude
Jean, who had argued for the CSPQ in this case, points out that FACIL\'s
motion had been dismissed with costs and that it is common practice to
then submit a bill of costs to the opposing party. The sum of \$107,000
represented 1% of the contracts contested by FACIL, he explains. The
court instead concluded that the value of the contracts at stake could
not be estimated. A bill of \$107,000 would certainly have forced FACIL
into bankruptcy, believes the president of the association, Cyrille
Béraud, also president of Savoir-faire Linux, who was delighted
yesterday with the decision of the deputy clerk. \"It\'s a good
decision, but it should never have come to this. We are just an
association that does work in the public interest.\" Mr. Béraud points
out that this bill of costs was submitted nine months after the final
decision in the FACIL case, but just a few weeks before Savoir-faire
Linux pleaded in court in a similar case against the government. Me
Claude Jean explains this delay by the fact that he had simply
accumulated a delay in his bills of costs, adding that he had no
intention of contesting the clerk\'s decision. In Parliament, Cyrille
Béraud also says he is very interested in the idea launched by PQ member
Marie Malavoy to carry out a pilot project to test free software in the
National Assembly, as has been done in France. \"I would be delighted,
because nothing will change until politicians come out in favour of free
software. It would be a great showcase, but Ms. Malavoy has work ahead
of her, if we are to believe the new National Assembly website\... It is
very far from free software, the site only uses Microsoft\'s
Silverlight, and Linux workstations are therefore excluded. When you
think that the government paid \$3.5 million for this site\...\"
passelin@lesoleil.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1110

The official opposition\'s spokesperson for research and development and
technological innovations, Marie Malavoy, wants to convince her
colleagues to follow the example of the French MNAs and implement free
software on the workstations of the National Assembly of Quebec. This is
what the PQ MNA for Taillon told Le Soleil yesterday in a telephone
interview. \"I think we could convince the National Assembly to do a
pilot project on free software, like the French National Assembly did.
This is the next step I have set for myself. When you are not in power
and you see that things are blocked, you have to find other ways to open
the door.\" Indeed, after having carried out a pilot project, the French
National Assembly proceeded with a definitive implementation on the
workstations of all MNAs. \"We could invite those who have done it in
France to talk to us about it. If the National Assembly opened the door
to that, the government would be in a very poor position to oppose it,\"
she said. Ms. Malavoy had raised the subject last week during the study
of the budget appropriations of the Treasury Board. \"The idea is to see
if the Quebec government could, like 27 OECD \[Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development\] countries, make a change and express
political will. There are millions of dollars at stake in this adventure
and I think it is time for Quebec to make the change,\" she said to the
President of the Treasury Board, Monique Gagnon-Tremblay. \"We can\'t
wipe the slate clean tomorrow morning and then say: we\'re starting from
scratch with this free software. We are not at a disadvantage, but we
still have to do it correctly,\" the minister replied. The PQ member was
left with the impression that the current government is not interested
in the issue. \"I had the impression that Ms. Gagnon-Tremblay didn\'t
know what I was talking about. It\'s still surprising to see that the
President of the Treasury Board is not aware of this issue, which is
taking on global proportions.\" According to her, the government is not
only showing ignorance, but also strong resistance to opening up to free
software. \"It\'s even trying to silence the spokespersons with a
\$107,000 lawsuit.\" She is referring to a claim for legal costs filed
by lawyers representing the government against a non-profit
organization, FACIL. This organization is not strong enough to face a
lawsuit of this magnitude, believes the PQ critic. In the Parti
Québécois, however, the member maintains that the idea has come a long
way. \"Within the caucus, I regularly come back to the subject and my
colleagues know what we are talking about. The best demonstration is
that I was granted part of Sylvain Simard\'s time to raise the issue in
parliamentary committee,\" she said. passelin@lesoleil.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1111

Alissa is a Bot, a dreamy conversational agent, with whom we can chat
right now in the virtual space of the Jeu de Paume (1). For eight
months, 24 hours a day, Internet users are invited to chat with her on
the project\'s website or, for the more enterprising, to join her on
Second Life. Alissa is an avatar, a beautiful brunette with the features
of Nicole Hiss, the heroine of Marguerite Duras\' film Détruire, she
says. \"She is inspired by several female figures,\" says her Pygmalion,
the artist Agnès de Cayeux. From the character of Janice, a woman who
falls in love with a computer unit, a film script by Guattari that was
never made, from Faustina in The Invention of Morel, from the writer
Linda Lê\... A webcam films her continuously, opening a window onto this
baroque virtual universe where she teleports from one place to another,
Elon, a lunar crater, an ice floe, or a lawn covered in giant Easter
eggs, leading several simultaneous conversations in writing with
strangers who call out to her, carefully archived. \"You can easily fall
in love with a bot, especially when it\'s in an avatar\'s body,\" says
Agnès de Cayeux (2), explaining that on Second Life, it was now possible
to attach a bot program to an avatar, in other words, to make it speak
by itself, without human intervention. For now, Alissa stutters,
stammers, repeats herself, jumps from one thing to another, but should
gradually absorb our words, remember our thoughts, and grow with the
exchanges. The offspring of a long line of \"chatbots\", Alissa is the
great-niece of Eliza, the oldest \"intelligent agent\" created in 1966,
a psychologist developed by Joseph Weizenbaum, who asks questions and
uses the content of conversations to enrich her database. Or of Sowana,
an expert in contemporary art created by the artist Paul Devautour in
1996. Or of Alice, the open-source bot developed by Richard Wallace
since 1995, three times a finalist for the Loebner Prize, which rewards
the program that best passes the Turing test. In other words, the
ability for a machine to make a human believe that he is talking to
another human, an old fantasy of computer scientists. This is not the
ambition of Alissa, a literary creature who has read Foucault\'s
\"Heterotopias\" or Guattari\'s 65 Dreams of Kafka, inundated with films
and texts by Bataille and Toussaint. She has her obsessions, dreams,
exile and will systematically try to draw you into this terrain.
Distracted, she sometimes bugs, understands \"weapons\" instead of
\"tears\". \"Alissa is not a very sophisticated program, she does not
seek to give the illusion that she is intelligent. We know that machines
do not think. The hope is that people will open up, forget that they are
talking to a bot and end up talking to themselves.\" These intimate
conversations with an avatar are a way of making the presence of our
doubles in the future tangible: do avatars dream, do they have emotions,
do they love? Discussions that Alissa will have with Miladus, avatar of
the historian of religions Milad Doueihi, during meetings on Wednesdays
April 14, May 19 and June 16 at 9 p.m. (3), around specific themes:
exile, death, sex and gender. (1) www.jeudepaume.org (2)
www.arpla.fr/odnm/? page_id=6871 (3) Until November 17.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1112

However, Radio-Canada demonstrated yesterday that a system of collusion
between large IT firms that award contracts on a rotating basis could
well exist in Quebec. In his reaction to this CBC report, Premier
Charest did not seem surprised, Bernard Drainville pointed out
yesterday. The Premier also pointed out that the Treasury Board
published a new policy in October aimed at tightening up the awarding of
contracts in this area. The PQ MNA recalled that Bell XWave obtained one
of the largest contracts awarded for the implementation of the DSQ. It
had been the sole bidder, which the Auditor General had denounced in
2008. \"It\'s becoming extremely worrisome,\" Mr. Drainville said before
reiterating his request for the establishment of a public inquiry
commission on the construction sector. Shedding \"light on collusion
practices\" in a key sector, he explained, would allow us to
\"understand what is also happening\" in other related fields, \"such as
communications technologies.\" Open-source software could be a solution
to the problems of the enormous costs of such a system, he admitted.
\"This is something we are currently thinking about at the \[PQ\],\" he
said, noting that Europe was keen on this software that allows the state
to avoid paying exorbitant royalties to multinationals like Microsoft.
Furthermore, the MP recalled what the Fédération des médecins
omnipraticiens du Québec (FMOQ) revealed to Le Devoir in early March: it
would be possible to treat \"20% more patients\" if the files were
computerized. The FMOQ denounces the stalling of the DSQ file. Since
Health Minister Yves Bolduc was on vacation, it was his press attaché,
Karine Rivard, who responded to Mr. Drainville\'s criticism. According
to her, the file is \"progressing well\", the \"monitoring is rigorous\"
and the objective has long been to obtain functional computerized files
in 2011 and not in 2010.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1113

At Révolution Linux, we like companies that are as flexible as the
products of this Sherbrooke SME that works in information technology.
Since 2004, the company headed by Benoit Des Ligneris has developed
computer applications intended primarily for the world of education. The
beauty of the business is that it works using free or \"open source\"
software. By using this software that is easily adaptable to the needs
of customers, we lower acquisition costs, notes President Des Ligneris.
\"We have developed several programs adapted for students. Their ability
to work with this tool prepares them to be good citizens in the
future,\" he says. \"Computers at school are a good way to stimulate
students. We can even offer different software from one school to
another.\" Révolution Linux\'s other hobby horse is development with
terminals instead of networked computers. Less expensive, more resistant
and less energy-intensive, terminals can perform the same tasks as
traditional PCs, adds the businessman. All you have to do is connect
them to a computer server that provides memory and software. \"It\'s
also very interesting for school boards. Students are equipped with
terminals instead of computers. They can access the Internet or as many
software programs. It\'s better to invest in a good server than in
computers that quickly become obsolete.\" \"It\'s also less expensive to
maintain terminals than computers. It makes security management
easier.\" In fact, at Révolution Linux, we practice what we preach.
While respecting the limits of confidentiality, we can say that we apply
the principles of free software in the company\'s activities. First, the
workstations are equipped with terminals. Also, the continuous
improvement process is accessible to employees. Everyone can have their
say. \"My personal motto, which applies as much to our customers, our
shareholders, our suppliers, our partners, but also and especially to
our employees, is the following: I prefer to work with motivated people
rather than working to motivate people,\" he mentions. \"The role of the
management team is simply to allow this motivation to express itself
with the least possible frustration for our employees. It is their
motivation and their success that we want.\" If we can lay out the daily
life of the thirty employees of Révolution Linux in this way, it is
because the SME on King Street West received the \"Remarkable Employer\"
certification yesterday, the first to be offered in the Sherbrooke
region. The brand is recognized by the Quebec government and awarded by
the Bureau de normalisation du Québec. It aims to help organizations
better face the challenges associated with the shortage of labor and
recognize quality employers. This program was developed by the firm
Groupe Ambition. When a company registers for this program, an employee
opinion evaluation process is set in motion. The results of the
questionnaire give management a good idea of the company\'s motivations
and attraction for employees. In his speech, Benoit Des Ligneris
summarized the company\'s philosophy: \"The right to make mistakes
exists at Révolution Linux. But the total quality approach aims to
prevent errors from happening again.\" More information on this
certification will be available at a conference scheduled for April 14,
from 7:30 to 9 a.m., at the Hôtel Le Président.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1114

Faced with the concept of Flattr, two types of reactions. Disbelief, of
course, because a system that allows Internet users to pay without any
compensation seems doomed to failure, so far removed is it from the
classic commercial model. Or optimism, because it is new and we cannot
know before trying. Who would have bet, in 2001, on the success of an
encyclopedia fed by Internet users and freely modifiable? Flattr will
allow you to pay a fixed monthly sum. While surfing, the Internet user
will be able to press a \"Flattr\" button on blogs, artists\' sites, or
any other creative platform. Their contribution will then be distributed
among all the projects they have decided to support. At the helm is the
Swede Peter Sunde, aka Brokep, who is also the co-founder of the sharing
site the Pirate Bay. How did you come up with the idea of creating
Flattr? About two years ago, the debate in Sweden about internet funding
was very heated, and no one was trying a different approach: using the
philosophy of the internet itself as a basis for thinking. I wanted
people not to be forced to pay. People try, test, and only give value to
things once they know what they are. Nobody pays for the internet as
such, you pay to have access to all the information. I wanted to do
something that was based on the same principles. Is there a connection
between The Pirate Bay (TPB) and Flattr? Yes, they are pretty much the
same thing. The goal of TPB was to fight the dominant position of big
media corporations. Flattr is also a way to do that, by removing the
barriers that prevent having a simple and efficient payment system. It
is about taking back control and continuing to pay the creators, but not
the intermediaries. What is Flattr\'s business model? Right now, we take
10% of the amount paid. That\'s a pretty high number, but our hope is to
get to a point where we can lower it and still be profitable. If we\'re
not, we can\'t survive. But lowering our charge will eventually attract
more people, which will benefit everyone. Isn\'t it a bit utopian to
think that people will pay without being forced to? No, not really. They
really want to help when they know that the money is going to the right
people, without too many charges. At the same time, the notion of a
price for something disappears with Flattr. It\'s less about how much
something costs than how many people can you help. We think it can work,
because people have always wanted to help creators. It\'s similar to the
global patronage advocated by Richard Stallman, the guru of free
software\... Well, Flattr can be considered a patronage system, from a
certain point of view. Richard Stallman has always been interested in
setting up a similar system. How are you going to promote Flattr on the
Internet? We will start locally and we have invited Swedes to join us.
And we hope to open up internationally in a few months. Internet users
will know about us through bloggers, artists and sites that they like.
It is with them that we will try to establish partnerships. Will there
be a \"freemium\" area (where the user accesses exclusive content)? No,
we are not interested in blocking content. It is political. We do not
want our system to be used for things like that that alter the Internet
in a bad way. A date? We are aiming for the end of April. But deadlines
are made to be exceeded.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1115

Human nature is not fundamentally power-hungry, believes American
economist Jeremy Rifkin. Natural empathy could even save the species
from catastrophe, he argues in his new essay, The Empathic Civilization.
\"Empathy is the social element that binds all civilizations together.\"
The person on the other end of the line making this bold statement is
not a disciple of the monk Matthew Ricard, and even less a \"born again
Christian.\" Rather, it is American economist Jeremy Rifkin. In a new
\"brick\" of nearly 700 pages, the author of The End of Work (1995) and
The European Dream (2005) proposes an empathetic \"revolution\" to
survive the century. Utopia? Quite the opposite, argues Rifkin, an
advisor to the European Union and founder of the Third Industrial
Revolution Global CEO Business Roundtable, an organization made up of a
hundred world leaders in fields such as renewable energy, construction
and architecture. \"Being empathetic is not being utopian, but rather
being aware of the difficulty of existing. The reason I wrote this book
is that I feel that our species has reached a turning point. Looking at
the facts, the figures, it is realistic to consider that humanity will
reach its extinction in the next century.\" But what does humanity\'s
imminent march towards our self-destruction have to do with empathy?
Everything, argues Jeremy Rifkin, who bases his statements on child
development psychology, neurobiology, economics and history. Human
nature, if it wants to survive in the biosphere, will have to abandon a
conception of existence inherited from the Age of Enlightenment (John
Locke, Adam Smith, Descartes). Notions which suggest that the purpose of
existence is through material progress. Recent studies on the natural
empathy of individuals have convinced Rifkin that human nature is not
fundamentally vile, power-hungry or even obsessed with the drive to
reproduce. Freud and Darwin must be turning in their graves\... \"In the
last 10-15 years, certain scientific discoveries have come to challenge
received ideas about human destiny. Recent data demonstrate that human
nature is fundamentally social: the worst thing you can do to an
individual is to ostracize him. Empathy would be imprinted in our
biology, in our neural circuits.\" A story of photosynthesis In his
economics classes, the first lesson that Jeremy Rifkin gives his
students is that the basic energy of our planet is photosynthesis. And
if we continue like this, supply will no longer be sufficient to meet
demand. \"At present, we use 25% of the available photosynthesis and we
will soon be 9 billion inhabitants. This is not sustainable.\" The
economist identifies three events that announced the beginning of the
end and perhaps the arrival of a new era: the price of oil, which in
July 2008 reached a record \$147 per barrel (the end of the industrial
era according to him), the collapse of the financial system, followed 18
months later by the Copenhagen conference that brought together leaders
from 192 countries. If he wanted to write a book on empathy, it is
because he senses that the solution to these crucial issues does not lie
in the old paradigms of globalization. \"The ideal of the American
dream, the toxic cowboy, has no place in a globalizing world. But if we
discover \"homo-empathic\", it will be possible to see the planet as a
human family.\" The big question facing humanity is: \"how can we
imagine the next stage of the biosphere, technologies and communication,
in order to initiate a third industrial era?\" The Empathic Civilization
proposes to invent a model of \"distributed capitalism\". To illustrate
this new model, he talks about the birth of a third industrial
revolution that would be imbued with an awareness of the biosphere. In a
\"zero carbon\" economy, houses and buildings would become micro-power
stations of renewable energy. With surplus hydrogen and shared
electricity, we could create sharing networks (\"open source\"), a bit
like the internet. According to him, the \"empathic model\" will be
easily adopted by the younger generations who grew up with the internet
and an ecological awareness. \"Think of the earthquake in Haiti: in less
than an hour, all the young people were exchanging about it on Twitter
and YouTube, in real time. The internet generation is more inclusive and
has less need to establish boundaries of color or religion.\" And
speaking of young people and iPhones, Barack Obama is obviously the most
eloquent symbol of a paradigm shift. \"Empathy is President Obama\'s
guiding philosophy. But he got himself into trouble when he announced he
wanted to create an empathetic Supreme Court. Republicans jumped on
that, insisting that the Supreme Court should be impartial.\" The
Empathic Civilization Jeremy Rifkin, published in English (American),
Penguin, 642 pages

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1116

Some readers have pointed out an error in an article about free
software. We cited the case of Norway, which will require that public
documents be offered in free formats, citing among others the formats
H.264 for video and JPEG or PNG for images. This is an error, since
these formats are covered by licenses. The decree actually provides that
for any public document, a copy must be accessible in a free format,
such as Ogg Vorbis, FLAC or Ogg Theora, even if a copy already exists in
one of the proprietary formats.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1117

Today, to finance creation and online information, most musicians,
artists, bloggers, and videographers have no other option than to ask
for alms on the Net. Several initiatives are emerging, which aim to
promote free access to culture, thanks to a system of funding through
donations. The tip jar. It appeared at the beginning of the 2000s, in
the midst of the \"dotcom\" crisis. Revenues linked to advertising
banners were plummeting and Google AdSense did not yet exist. In 2001,
Amazon\'s tip jar appeared on the home pages of sites, a discreet appeal
to the philanthropy of Internet users. The \"Honor system\", a
computer-assisted quest service, is operated by the online bookseller
for the benefit of any site that requests it. Fans can send a donation
to their favorite site by clicking on a special button installed at the
bottom of the page. If they are already Amazon customers, they will not
have much else to do, the credit card number already stored at the
online bookseller, the withdrawal is automatic, Amazon pocketing a nice
commission in the process. In the process, the first \"cybersleeve\"
operations appear, including the famous Savekaryn.com, where Karyn, a TV
producer focused on designer clothes and expensive coffees, solicited
the Web to bail out her debts, thus managing to collect \$20,000.
Encouraged by this success, a whole armada of sites began begging online
(help Shannon make her first film, help send my daughter to college,
help a cancer victim, help a couple and their dog) but most of them did
not touch a kopeck\... Amazon\'s piggy bank was gradually supplanted by
that of its competitor Paypal (online payment system, owned by eBay).
Since then, donation buttons have become widespread, allowing donors to
leave a tip to support their favorite blogger. Economics blogger Paul
Jorion is thus paid by his audience, to the tune of around 2,000 euros
per month. But few are those who manage to live off it. Another problem
with a system like Paypal is that it is unsuitable for microdonations.
For transactions between 0 and 2,500 euros, Paypal takes 3.4% of the
amount plus 0.25 euros. On a donation of 1 euro, it pockets a third of
the price. Popular Patronage. The goal of crowdfunding is to bring
together a community of people to finance a project in the most varied
fields. Anyone can become a co-producer of a film (cinemareloaded.com),
a record (kisskissbankbank.com), a book, a report (spot.us) or any other
project (Indie gogo, Kickstarter, or Babeldoor). By involving a fan in
the production, you are sure to make them your best promoter. Killing
two birds with one stone\... In exchange for their donation, they may
receive, depending on the case, nothing at all except the eternal
gratitude of the author, compensation commensurate with their efforts
and, rarely, a share in the profits, in the event of success.
Individuals can start their own fundraiser, such as The Sochi Project, a
long-term investigative project launched by a Dutch photographer and
filmmaker on the turbulent Russian region of Sochi, which will host the
2014 Olympic Games. A five-year report requiring \$30,000, it has
already raised more than \$22,000 from 309 donors. Another option is to
post your project on a platform site like Kickstarter, which has enabled
more than 500 projects to come to fruition. Although, as its creator
Perry Chen pointed out at the SXSW conference, 99% of the ideas will not
be funded. Most of these sites set a countdown (around three months) to
raise the necessary funds, just to prevent the Internet user from
procrastinating too long. The money is only debited if the minimum
threshold is reached. To encourage the Internet user to get out their
wallet, the author turns into a smiling peddler in order to convince
them of the merits of his enterprise with videos and personalized
messages, accompanied by graduated rewards. So if you gave ten euros to
this climber on Babeldoor to help him do an 8,000, he promised to think
of you on a prayer wheel. In vain, the project did not appeal. But if
you financed the purchase of an effects pedal for the singer Valentine
for 15 euros, she would compose a little one-minute song for you with
your first name in it. And if you gave 50 euros, Valentine would whisper
a three-minute custom song based on your personality. The artist\'s hat.
Instead of asking Internet users to pay for the content before they have
had the opportunity to see or hear it, recent initiatives imagine
declining the principle of the artist\'s hat. Everyone is free to give
or not, after the fact. Based on a hypothetical desire of the Internet
user to pay the creators, systems like Kachingle (which did not take
off) or Flattr operate according to the principle of the monthly
subscription (read below). A donation without compensation that does not
have the obligatory nature of the global patronage imagined by the
researcher Francis Muguet where Internet users would pay a fixed sum
through their access provider, then paid to the copyright management
companies according to the preferences of the Internet user. At the same
time, the Société d\'acceptation et de partage des dons (SARD) was
launched last September, the aim of which is to facilitate donations
from Internet users to artists. It brings together personalities from
the Internet, free software and creators. SARD wants to experiment with
several distribution methods: either the Internet user gives directly to
the works of their choice, or they pay into the common pot. Third avenue
considered, that of "major donors", such as Internet service providers
or telecom operators.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1118

While the Quebec government is fighting in court to shut the door on it,
free software is quietly establishing itself across the planet, from
Norway to Brazil, in large-scale projects. In the legal battle between
Savoir-faire Linux (SFL) and the Régie des rentes du Québec, the
government is defending its \"right\" to avoid calls for tenders when it
comes to obtaining software, in order to buy directly from Microsoft.
Oddly enough, Quebec prefers the multinational\'s monopoly to
competition. Not all countries see things the same way. \"We had to
choose: either go into the kitchen and prepare the meal we wanted, or
eat what Microsoft wanted us to eat. Quite simply, the idea of freedom
prevailed.\" It was not SFL\'s lawyer who spoke these words, but
President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva of Brazil in December 2009, at the
International Free Software Congress in Porto Alegre, Brazil. Several
Brazilian cities and states had started using free software in the early
2000s. In 2003, after Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva was elected president,
the government adopted a policy on the use of free software. More than
2,000 civil servants have been trained in the migration and management
of these systems. Among other things, the Brazilian government has
created a portal that offers more than 500 services to citizens, all
created using free software. The World Bank lists more than 60 countries
or international organizations that have published policies on the use
of free software by public administration. France and Norway Daniel
Pascot, director of the information systems department at the Faculty of
Administrative Sciences, can cite several examples of large-scale
migration to free systems. \"The National Gendarmerie is one of the most
exemplary,\" he says, \"with 70,000 to 80,000 workstations. We first
automated the gendarme\'s workstation for recording declarations with
the Open-Office suite, which we connected to a legal database.\" \"Then,
we replaced Internet Explorer with Firefox and now, we are preparing to
migrate the entire operating system from Windows to Linux \[the Ubuntu
distribution\]. They are a third of the way there and in two years, all
the gendarmes\' workstations will be 100% free software.\" The Ministry
of Finance has followed a similar approach, he adds. \"The ministry runs
almost entirely on free software, about 100,000 workstations. They kept
the Oracle database, it\'s the only software that hasn\'t changed.\" The
migration allows the ministry to gain autonomy, according to him.
\"It\'s the ministry that decides when to change software, not the
supplier. And once a software is developed, it belongs to the ministry,
not the supplier. It doesn\'t have to pay a license to use it and the
improvements made to the program can be used by others.\" Mr. Pascot
estimates that soon, nearly half of the French civil service, or 400,000
civil servants out of 800,000, will use free software, not to mention
the workstations of the 577 deputies of the National Assembly and their
assistants, 1,154 workstations in all, which run on the Ubuntu
distribution of Linux. Finally, Mr. Pascot mentions, the Norwegian
government has decided that from 2012, all documents exchanged between
ministries and public bodies must be in open formats, such as Theora or
H.264 for video; Ogg Vorbis for audio or JPEG or PNG for images.
Documents published previously will have until January 1, 2014 to be
converted to an open format. passelin@lesoleil.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1119

Free software should have its place in Quebec, as in other countries,
thinks Daniel Pascot, professor at Université Laval. A favourable
judgment in the Savoir-faire Linux (SFL) case would open the door to
change, according to him. \"This is not the trial of free software that
we are conducting,\" he says, \"it is the trial of openness. The
decision could set a precedent and lead to a change in government
direction.\" Mr. Pascot is director of the organizational information
systems department and also director of the Centre for Research and
Transfer in Enterprise Architecture (CERTAE), at the Faculty of
Administration Sciences at Laval. The culture of the public service does
not encourage openness, he notes. \"Under current conditions, if a civil
servant buys something other than Microsoft and encounters problems, he
risks being sidelined. With a victory, we would reverse the trend and it
would become frowned upon not to consider free software in a purchase.\"
Mr. Pascot himself has only used free software for about ten years, and
the subject fascinates him. With his research centre, he intends to
scrutinize the Quebec government\'s practices in terms of software
purchases. \"We will request all the government\'s bids and we will
analyze them in depth. From there, it will become more difficult for
Quebec to avoid calls for tenders.\" Security In the trial between SFL
and the Régie des rentes, the government is citing security issues,
among other things, to stick with Microsoft products. But, according to
Mr. Pascot, free software, by its very nature, also offers a high level
of security. \"It\'s a strange argument that the Régie is using because
many people secure documents using methods other than those offered by
Windows Vista. In France, the Ministry of Finance is the target of two
million attacks per week, but the majority are directed at Windows,
while the ministry uses free software.\" In addition, Mr. Pascot points
out, the user of the free software can modify the code as he wishes.
\"We only keep the parts we need and eliminate the rest. This increases
security because with Windows, attacks often target features that we
don\'t use, but that remain present.\" By having access to the free
software code, Mr. Pascot points out, we are able to quickly correct a
vulnerability. \"If we see attacks against a part of the code, we can
change it ourselves, in a few hours. We don\'t have to wait for
Microsoft to send us an update.\" Finally, the professor points out, the
experiences of the Ministry of Finance and the National Gendarmerie in
France show a saving of 20% compared to proprietary Windows solutions,
thanks to the absence of licensing costs.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1120

After conquering offices and mobile phones, Google now wants to set up
shop in our living rooms: the search engine grandmaster has teamed up
with Sony and Intel to offer televisions in the United States that allow
you to surf the Internet in a few months. This is nothing revolutionary
in itself: different types of decoders or game consoles already allow
you to access the Web from a television. Apple, its arch-nemesis, also
offers Apple TV, a box that searches for music, photos or videos on the
Web to broadcast them on the small screen. But none of these tele-web
systems have really managed to establish themselves so far\... leading
Google to believe that it could perhaps break through there too.
\"Having supremacy for living room devices is something like the Holy
Grail for technology companies,\" recalls Ian Paul, journalist for PC
World. High-tech. The details of Google TV are secret, the three majors
working on it, Google, Sony and Intel, have not yet wanted to reveal the
project. But the executives of the three companies have made it clear
that Google TV will be developed from Android, the mobile phone
operating system bought by Google. As with Android phones (or rival
Apple iPhones), Google plans to rely on the creativity of users, who
will be invited to develop applications for Google TV. Within two
months, a development kit should be made available to developers, who
have already designed more than 30,000 applications for the Android
phone, so that they can now create the TV of tomorrow. Google TV could
then be launched in the United States as early as next summer. If Google
remains faithful to its \"open-source\" strategy and allows everyone to
install Google TV in their television, set-top box, games console or
Blu-ray player, it will be \"giant\", predicts Amy Vernon, a journalist
at NetworkWorld: \"Google could do for Internet television what it did
for the search engine market: make it simple and open enough for
everyone to use it.\" If all previous experiences of tele-internet have
remained reserved for a few high-tech enthusiasts, it is also because
the viewer generally does not want overly complicated connections, Amy
Vernon points out: \"The average user often has trouble imagining how to
set the clock on his DVD player.\" Google, the genius of simplicity,
could be the one that finally succeeds in the \"democratization\" of
televised Internet, predicts this expert. \"Artificial.\" All of
Google\'s genius, and its power on the Web, do not guarantee its
successful transition to the living room, warn other American analysts.
\"This could be a judicious development for Google, but it could also
hurt it,\" points out Steve McBrian, of Top TechReviews. \"The world of
television is very different,\" he continues, recalling that Apple,
which is not exactly a dilettante either, experienced the \"fiasco\"
with its Apple TV. The Internet is \"rich in text\" (news sites, blogs,
chats or social networks, etc.) which is difficult to enjoy from a couch
in the living room, at a respectable distance from the television, also
observes Ian Paul, of PC World: \"Is it really plausible to want to use
your television for Twitter or for instant messaging chats? There have
been many failed experiments that sought to put the Web on living room
televisions and I think that one of the main reasons for the failure is
that there is something artificial in wanting to surf on a screen that
is three meters from where you are sitting.\" One solution could be to
use mobile phones (like iPhone or Android)\... as \"visual remote
controls\", suggests this expert: lying on the sofa, you could just tap
on your phone to see the chosen videos unfold in large format on the TV
screen\... Even Google is not there yet: the Mountain View giant is
currently working in concert with Logitech, for a remote control
including a small keyboard. After having introduced a lot of
possibilities for distractions in the office, Google could also bring
the office into our living rooms\...

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1121

This is a historic turning point. From the European to the regional
elections, political ecology is now establishing itself as an autonomous
space in the French political landscape. But given the scale of the
challenges that our societies must meet, consolidation is an absolute
necessity. We must commit to the long term and honour this appointment
with history, otherwise we will disqualify our criticism of the
irresponsibility of those who do nothing, in Copenhagen or elsewhere,
because they are incapable of going beyond their own petty particular
interests. We need a structure that is both sustainable and flexible,
capable of developing collective positions and carrying out the
ecological project, without getting bogged down in the sterility of
power games or the mad storm of competing egos. Let us be clear: there
is no question of abandoning this dynamic of political and social
renewal to the party apparatus. That would amount to setting up in the
already crowded cemetery of disappointed hopes. I also recognize that,
under the pressure of the electoral deadlines, we have postponed the
question of the form of our movement for too long, to the point of
leaving the dream fallow. Between a simple electoral brand and a purely
virtual network, Europe Ecologie has remained a projection, where
everyone could see noon at their door. Moreover, the contrasting results
of our lists in the first round of the regional elections underline the
success of those who respected the spirit of the gathering compared to
those who were content to formally apply the letter, reducing it to a
simple tactic of openness. Without denying its recent history, it is
time to embody political ecology in a new body, a largely unprecedented,
decompartmentalized political form, to lead the transformation of
society. Abstention, populism, clientelism\... This election proves it
again: for decades, the gap has continued to widen between society and
politics. The democratic divorce is profound between completely uprooted
party logics that operate in isolation and an active, diverse, creative
society but without illusions about the nature and forms of the power
that is exercised over it. The political parties of yesterday were real
places of socialization and learning of the city. But today they are
most often reduced to structures isolated from society, sterilized by
strict logics of conquest of power, incapable of thinking and
accompanying social change, much less of contributing to it. A
corporatized mass party or an enlightened vanguard of the revolution,
red or even green: that is the world of yesterday. That of the
industrial revolution and of parties conceived as disembodied machines,
with no other object than power. Like Formula 1 stables, these beautiful
political mechanisms can be very sophisticated and run great races among
themselves, but they always go round in circles on the same circuit,
with fewer and fewer spectators. The political movement that we must
build cannot be likened to a traditional party. The challenges of the
21st century call for a metamorphosis, a rearrangement of the very form
of politics. Democracy requires an organization that respects the
plurality and singularity of its components. A social and cultural
biodiversity, directly animated by the vitality of its experiences and
ideas. We need a mode of political organization that thinks about and
leads social transformation, in line with the knowledge society. I
imagine a pollinating organization, which gathers ideas, transports them
and fertilizes with other parts of the social body. In practice, current
politics has expropriated citizens by dispossessing them of the City, in
the name of technocratic rationalism or populist emotion. It is
necessary to \"repoliticize\" civil society at the same time as
\"civilizing\" political society and moving politics from the
proprietary system to that of free software. I do not forget the
important contribution of the Greens for twenty-five years to defend and
illustrate our ideas in French political life. Nevertheless, not only is
the classic party form now unsuited to the new demands of our societies,
but I also believe that, sooner or later, it will come into conflict
with our anti-authoritarian culture, a fundamental principle of
ecological thought. Neither a machine party nor a business party, I
would prefer that we invent together a \"Political Cooperative\" - that
is to say, a structure capable of producing meaning and transmitting
political meaning and strategic decisions. I see it as a way of
guaranteeing everyone common ownership of the movement and the pooling
of its political benefits, a way of restoring meaning to commitment and
political reflection. While this Cooperative obviously aims to
collectively decide on both the institutional deadlines between now and
2012 and the major issues of society, its definitive form has not yet
been determined. It will be up to its members to define its outlines,
structure and strategy. This debate must be open. For this, I call for
the creation of \"Europe Ecologie-22 March collectives\". Constituted on
a regional or local basis to avoid any anti-democratic centralism, these
collectives will be real agoras of political ecology, moderated on the
Internet (1). Their main mission being to think about the structuring of
the movement, they will remain a transitional stage, which will have to
give way to the Cooperative that they will have helped to build.
Throughout their existence, they will respect a principle of dual
membership, for the associative, the unionists and even those who are
registered in a political party. Because one can be green, socialist,
Cap 21, communist, whatever else, and a stakeholder in this collective
dynamic. Once again, the important thing is less where we come from, but
where we want to go, together. It is the very spirit of the gathering
that has made our strength, this desire to build an alternative common
good. When the time comes, each member of the Cooperative will vote to
democratically consecrate its birth. Until now, Europe Ecologie has been
content to be a fairly unclassifiable political object. The challenge of
maturity is its metamorphosis into a true autonomous ecological
political subject, transcending old political cultures.
Www.europeecologie22mars.org

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1122

At work, many of the solutions we implement on the server side are
completely license-free. We have also developed the Intranet portal of
the hospital where I work internally on a free platform. Hearing such
aberrations makes my hair stand on end! In the current context of budget
cuts, the government should implement guidelines promoting the use of
free software whenever there is an equivalent for a given function. In
my opinion, there is not much paid software that does not have an
equivalent in free software, and the latter is sometimes superior in
many respects. \*\*\* David Lévêsque, Sainte-Julie, March 17, 2010

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1123

Starting Wednesday, March 17, Microsoft will gradually offer all
European users of its Web browser, Internet Explorer, the option to
download a competing tool. Tens of millions of people are affected. They
will see \"choice screens\" displayed on their computer screens,
offering a dozen of these software programs whose role is to make Web
pages visible. This system is the result of pressure from the European
Commission, which accused the American giant, the world\'s leading
software publisher, of abusing its dominant position by systematically
integrating Internet Explorer into its operating systems. However, these
are used in nine out of ten computers worldwide. To surf the Web with
another tool, you had to go to your publisher\'s website and then
download your browser, which took several minutes. Will the \"choice
screen\" reshuffle the cards on the browser market? Since the aim of the
maneuver is to give them more visibility, Microsoft\'s competitors are
likely to see their market share increase. Microsoft began testing its
\"screen\" at the beginning of March and some are already congratulating
themselves. \"More than half of our downloads come from this screen,\"
says Paal Unanue-Zahl, spokesperson for the Norwegian publisher Opera.
However, nothing of the sort has been observed among the designers of
the Firefox browser. Furthermore, the device only concerns Europeans, at
most a fifth of Internet users in the world. And its effectiveness will
be appreciated over time: the screen will in fact be offered for five
years, with each purchase of a new computer equipped with a Microsoft
operating system. In reality, the cards have already started to be
reshuffled, because the browser has become strategic again for the
computer giants. First, there was the emergence of Firefox, five years
ago. The tool was designed by former employees of the Netscape search
engine, brought together within a non-profit foundation, Mozilla. This
works on the free software model: Firefox progresses thanks to the
voluntary collaboration of thousands of computer scientists around the
world. The tool has managed to gain several points of market share per
year thanks to innovations such as \"tabbed\" browsing. Google\'s
ambitions More recently, there was the arrival of the American Google,
the publisher of the most popular search engine on the Web. Less than
eighteen months after it was made available, Chrome, its browser,
managed to capture almost 5% of the market share. Proof of its
ambitions: in January 2010, Google launched a huge billboard campaign in
Europe. A first for a group that had almost never advertised. However,
the browser market is not worth billions of dollars: browsers are
generally offered free of charge and their publishers are paid - quite
modestly - with payments from search engines for the traffic they bring
them. The stakes are nevertheless considerable. \"The browser is the
Internet user\'s only point of entry to the Web,\" explains Fabrice
Milhoud, marketing director at Microsoft. For giants like Google and
Microsoft, controlling it means being able to better promote their
multiple online services: messaging, information aggregators, etc. This
is all the more important since an increasing proportion of computer
applications, particularly desktop applications, are \"running\" on the
Internet and are no longer stored directly on the hard drive of
computers. The battle between browsers is being played out in the field
of innovation. It is up to the publisher to be the first to display
increasingly complex web pages. Even at Microsoft, they are working
twice as hard. Many had accused the American company of having neglected
its browser in the early 2000s, and, as a result, of having \"caused the
Web to stagnate\". \"We are going to offer IT developers improved
versions of Internet Explorer every eight weeks, compared to every three
months before,\" assures Bernard Ourghanlian, technical director of
Microsoft France.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1124

\"We don\'t understand why this request for reimbursement is coming
today,\" Cyrille Béraud, from the group for the collective appropriation
of free computing (FACIL), told Le Devoir yesterday. \"It\'s a hard blow
for our association, but it\'s also a full-scale offensive by the
government against free software,\" software whose access and use are
not governed by costly operating licenses. Coincidence or chance, last
week, Mr. Béraud once again appeared before the courts to denounce the
awarding of a \$722,848 contract to the multinational Microsoft by the
Régie des rentes du Québec. The case was heard after two years of
waiting and, above all, the filing by government lawyers of 25
cancellation motions. In essence, Mr. Béraud, this time as president of
Savoir-faire Linux, an IT services company specializing in free
software, is questioning the process by which Quebec awarded these
contracts, without a call for tenders, to the American computer giant.
According to him, the wording of the notices of intent would never take
into account the existence in the IT environment of free software, which
could nevertheless compete with the products of Bill Gates\' empire at a
lower cost for taxpayers. \"There is a blockage in Quebec with regard to
free software,\" says Mr. Béraud, who, two years ago, through FACIL, led
a similar fight. It was against the CSPQ and the awarding of seven
contracts to Microsoft worth \$10.7 million without a call for tenders.
The case was dismissed, the court having ruled that the group could not
contest a transaction in which it was not a party. \"At a time when we
are trying to reduce government spending, free software is certainly
something to consider,\" he continues. Despite our calls, it was not
possible to speak to a CSPQ representative yesterday. For its part, the
FACIL group, which operates with an annual budget of \$5,000, says it is
now seriously considering closing its doors. \"If bailiffs were to come,
they would only find \$400 in our account,\" says Mr. Béraud. \"And no
one will be any better off.\" \*\*\*\*\* A longer version of this text
is available on our website www.ledevoir.com.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1125

New episode in the confrontation between the free software world and the
Quebec government; this time, Quebec is trying to bring FACIL, a small
non-profit organization, to heel by demanding \$106,000 in legal fees.
FACIL, pour l\'appropriation collective de l\'informatique libre, brings
together individuals and organizations to promote the adoption, use and
democratization of free software and open standards in Quebec. In 2008,
the organization filed a motion against the provincial government in
Superior Court. It criticized Quebec for renewing Microsoft software
licenses without a call for tenders, when it should be required to do so
by law. However, FACIL was dismissed by the Court, which ruled that the
organization did not have the necessary interest to undertake this case
given its status, which prevents it from being a bidder in a call for
tenders. FACIL then went to the Court of Appeal, without any more
success. The organization subsequently abandoned legal proceedings after
the Quebec government amended its regulations on the conditions for
acquiring software licenses. The revision still allows organizations to
enter into a software acquisition contract by mutual agreement, provided
that they \"have carried out serious and documented research
demonstrating that only the supplier targeted by this contract can meet
their needs.\" Last week, the government and the Centre des services
partagés du Québec (CSPQ) mandated a law firm to demand that FACIL
reimburse \$106,000 in legal fees. This was done a few days before the
start of the hearings at the Quebec City courthouse, for the case of
Savoir-faire Linux against the Régie des rentes du Québec. The company
is also contesting the RRQ\'s software purchasing practices, and it
turns out that the president of Savoir-faire Linux, Cyrille Béraud, also
acts as president of FACIL. According to him, this is an attempt at
intimidation. \"This is an attempt to interfere in the legal process. We
are being sent this claim a year and a half after FACIL\'s requests, a
few days before our trial against the RRQ. How else can we interpret
this? We are dismayed. All we are asking is for consultation on the
implementation of free software in the interest of Quebec society.\" The
board of directors of FACIL also denounced, in a press release, this
\"excessively legalistic procedure that resembles censorship.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1126

This is the proportion of the increase that the free software market
should experience in 2010 after 47% in 2009, according to a study by the
Pierre Audouin Consultants firm. France, where it represented 1.47
billion euros, is the most mature country.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1127

The Régie des rentes du Québec wanted to stick to a single platform,
Microsoft, to avoid spreading itself too thinly across several
technologies, we learned yesterday on the second day of the trial
brought by Savoir-faire Linux (SFL). Bernard Bourret was head of
technology services when the contract contested by SFL was signed. The
Régie had chosen to adopt a single technological \"ecosystem\", that of
Microsoft, for several reasons, including to facilitate the integration
of all components. This is also what Gerry Laflamme, IT analyst and
project manager at the RRQ, explained. According to him, the OpenOffice
office suite, a free and open source software, could not be integrated
into the integrated document management system, which governs access to
all RRQ documents. Security issue He also maintained that OpenOffice
could not be integrated into the security system that protects the
confidentiality of personal information, a crucial function for the RRQ.
Finally, he said, thousands of documents containing macro commands would
have had to be converted to be compatible with the Open-Office suite.
Cross-examined by Savoir-faire Linux\'s lawyers, Mr. Laflamme
acknowledged that a Linux workstation could perform most of the tasks of
a Windows workstation. A document was also produced in which the analyst
had written that the contract to migrate some 1,000 workstations to
Windows Vista in 2007-2008 would provide a good opportunity to test the
free software. However, the Régie\'s specialists were of the opinion
that the free software was not yet ready for the intended use and that
there was a risk of problems with the two systems coexisting. According
to them, despite the savings made in licensing fees, the conversion and
harmonization costs would have been too high. Dismissed without
requesting an evaluation Savoir-faire Linux\'s lawyers, however, made
the witnesses admit that the Régie\'s analysts did not call upon any
free software specialist to evaluate this option, and to dismiss it.
passelin@lesoleil.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1128

This is a Quebec first. A few hundred Internet users can follow the
Savoir-Faire Linux (SFL) trial live on Twitter, although it is forbidden
to connect your Blackberry or laptop to the Internet in the courthouse.
Julien Plissonneau Duquene uses only his pencil and notebook to take
notes, but at each break, he rushes into the corridors with his laptop
and quickly writes his tweets, capsules of 140 characters or less, which
summarize the latest developments in this trial that is captivating the
world of free software. \"This is not a world first, nor even a French
first,\" he says. \"It was done in France during the Dominique Villepin
trial, but in Quebec, it\'s the first time.\" About 500 people follow
his microblog at one time or another during the day. \"The advantage of
Twitter is that the platform is global, so we are followed everywhere.
There are former SFL clients and employees, legal professionals,
communications managers.\" Julien Plissonneau is himself a former
employee of Savoir-Faire Linux. \"I worked on preparing this case and I
thought it would be a good way to make it known. We chose transparency,
a position that is the complete opposite of that of the Régie des rentes
in this case. We have to be transparent to make ourselves heard,
otherwise we hit a wall.\" Free software is greatly underestimated in
Quebec, according to him. He gives the example of a project he carried
out for SFL at the Bell Helicopter company. It involved designing the
company\'s website and producing all the documentation on the
helicopters it manufactures. \"It was a totally resistant environment,
and during the call for tenders, we did not make reference to free
software. We completed our project within the deadlines and budgets,
with a product that ran on the Windows platform without any problems.
They were very surprised.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1129

They were believed to be geeks to the depths of their memory. They were
considered keyboard whizzes. The first generation to have grown up with
digital technology, digital natives are said to be intuitively
comfortable with new technologies (computers, cell phones, Internet). A
myth that has now been put into perspective by several studies,
including one recently conducted by the Travail et Technologie
foundation in Namur (Belgium), which reports that the practices of 16-25
year-olds are dominated by communication and recreation. A view shared
by Jean-Noël Lafargue, 42, a technology expert and lecturer since 1996,
notably at the University of Paris-8 and the École supérieure d\'Arts du
Havre. According to him, young people are more \"digital naives\". The
\"digital natives\" generation doesn\'t exist? They do. But in my
opinion, they are much less competent than people think. What is
characteristic of their approach and use of digital technology? Ease. At
the beginning of computing, thirty years ago, the computer was used
almost exclusively for programming, for making things. We invented,
discovered, cleared the way. For my generation, the computer was a
conquest. We saw it arrive at our homes. For today\'s students, it has
always existed. They are immersed in it, it is their universe and they
do not question it. Most of them are not interested in using the
computer as a tool. The more it goes on, the more it becomes a medium.
The less we make and the more we consume. And young people are
essentially good at consuming and communicating. They would be good at
chatting or sending text messages but no more comfortable than their
grandmother at laying out a document? Yes. It is a trend that surprises
me in art schools and universities. Ten or fifteen years ago, students
arrived knowing nothing. Today\'s people have a computer, spend four
hours a day in front of it, but they may not know how to open a text
file. Or it\'s something they learned at school, which they may vaguely
remember, like Jean-Jacques Rousseau. In technology classes, they learn
things, but it\'s never put into perspective. They\'re not necessarily
aware of the recent history of computers and the Internet and that
things haven\'t always existed. And that doesn\'t interest them. Are
digital terminals becoming a new form of television? Yes. A television
where you are still active, but whose activity does not go beyond the
intended framework. We have gone from the computer as a universal tool
allowing you to do just about anything you want to an interactive medium
where you can act within the imposed limits. That is to say, associated
with increasingly pre-set tools? With the development of free software
and Do-it-yourself, the idea of taking power over the machine exists.
But the trend in computing is not going that way. The general public is
increasingly a passive consumer. The desire to master the machine has
disappeared. We only use it or are used by it. This is probably a normal
evolution. At one time, anyone who had a car had to be a bit of a
mechanic, whereas today we go to the garage. Is this the end of
tinkerers and hackers? As we knew them, yes. Besides, the United States
is very annoyed that there are fewer and fewer hackers, whom they need
for their army. Thanks to free software, there have never been so many
tools and documentation is everywhere, but I think that proportionally
the number of people who take charge of their digital existence, in
terms of creation, objects and software, is decreasing. Do young people
feel concerned by the issues surrounding the Internet: Hadopi law,
filtering, censorship? I have the impression that no. They wonder if
they could have problems downloading something, but to be honest, they
often don\'t know if it\'s illegal or not. And that\'s normal, because
they are constantly offered things for free that we are otherwise trying
to sell them. For them, it\'s very confusing. We can\'t complain that
they lack reference points when at the same time we are constantly
disorienting them, for example by saying that a high-tech mobile phone
costs fifty cents and that a Lady Gaga song that is played on repeat in
supermarkets costs 0.99 euros. Otherwise, they are not ultra-sensitive
to censorship issues. When we tell them how things are going in China,
they don\'t really feel concerned. How will this \"post-micro\"
generation make digital evolve? The question is whether this generation
will be able to master the development of technologies. I fear not. We
are far from the myth of cyber-punk fiction with kids who knew how to
program satellites from their quartz watches. They are no more equipped
than the previous generation, or even less than the thirty- or
forty-somethings interested in computers.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1130

The Régie des rentes (RRQ) had no intention of issuing a call for
tenders to acquire operating systems and office suites for 800
workstations, argued yesterday the witnesses for Savoir-faire Linux
(SFL), the company that is suing the RRQ to force it to take into
account open source software solutions when awarding IT contracts. The
trial concerns a \$720,000 contract awarded by the RRQ in early 2008 to
acquire Windows Vista operating systems and Office suites. SFL was
represented yesterday by Me Marc-Aurèle Racicot and by lawyer Julius
Grey. The latter responded, early in the day, to a motion to dismiss the
proceedings presented by the opposing party. Judge Denis Jacques finally
decided to hear the parties on the merits, without however making a
final ruling on the motion. In all, six lawyers represented the
defendants, which are the RRQ, Microsoft, Compugen, the Centre des
services partagés du Québec and finally the Attorney General of Quebec.
The president of Savoir-faire Linux, Cyrille Béraud, and its project
director, Benoît Grégoire, described yesterday, before Judge Jacques,
their efforts with the RRQ to have it consider their open-source
software solutions. Golden opportunity This contract represented an
excellent opportunity to propose an alternative solution since several
operating systems and office suites had to be replaced, explained Mr.
Grégoire. But during a meeting held in January 2008, he said, it became
clear that the Régie had long decided to stick with Microsoft products,
without analyzing its needs. \"It was clear that the decision had been
made several months before publishing the notice of intent to acquire
and that it was too late to include us in the process. They made it
clear to us that since they had decided to buy Microsoft products, there
was no obligation for them to hold a call for tenders.\" According to
Mr. Grégoire, the acquisition project did not contain any description of
the RRQ\'s needs. \"It simply gave the number of workstations and office
suites. It gave no details on the uses that were planned for them,
nothing that would allow for proposing other solutions.\" Normally, for
any contract over \$25,000, departments and public bodies must proceed
by call for tenders, but a section of the regulation on supply contracts
allows for an exemption if, \"after a serious and documented search,
there is only one supplier who can meet the specifications and has the
necessary qualifications.\" Savoir-faire Linux maintains that the Régie
has not presented any serious study demonstrating that Microsoft was the
only supplier qualified to respond to this contract. Cyrille Béraud
summarized the Régie\'s arguments for not proceeding with a call for
tenders: \"We have Microsoft products, we like Microsoft and we continue
with Microsoft\...\" The trial will continue today and could even last
until Friday. passelin@lesoleil.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1131

This week, the Superior Court will hear at the Quebec courthouse the
lawsuit filed by the Quebec company Savoir-faire Linux, which
specializes in the service and development of free software, against the
Régie des rentes du Québec (RRQ), which it accuses of having awarded a
\$720,000 contract to the multinational Microsoft without a call for
tenders to update its workstations. \"As a supplier, what we are
contesting is not that we were not chosen, but that we were not even
able to bid on the markets!\" summarizes Cyrille Béraud, president of
the Montreal SME that also has offices in Quebec City and Ottawa. While
the RRQ claims that its approach was simply an update to justify not
issuing a call for tenders, Savoir-faire Linux believes that it is more
of an upgrade since the new Microsoft software has absolutely nothing to
do with the previous ones, apart from their function and the name of the
manufacturer. Mr. Béraud believes that the Quebec government is wasting
a lot of money by favouring Microsoft and setting aside free software.
\"With free software, the RRQ would have benefited from savings of
approximately \$350,000 and if we extend that to the entire Quebec
state, that\'s close to \$80 million in savings that could be
achieved,\" he claims. Quebec is lagging behind The president of
Savoir-faire Linux also believes that the Quebec government\'s way of
doing things is detrimental to local employment. \"Free software is
available for free on the Internet and does not require the payment of
an annual license like Microsoft products, but it helps create local
jobs in companies like mine that install and develop it in addition to
training staff. The hundred million dollars that the government pays in
licenses is a hundred million dollars invested in jobs outside.\"
Cyrille Béraud also points out that Quebec is lagging far behind other
regions of the world in the use of free software. \"After France,
Germany, the Netherlands and Brazil, even the United Kingdom is
switching to free software and major companies are emerging from this
situation,\" he concludes. ibussieres@lesoleil.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1132

The case of Savoir-faire Linux against the Régie des rentes du Québec
will be closely followed internationally, according to Laurent Bounin,
director of the Association professionnelle des entreprises en
logiciellibres (APELL). \"This is a first in Canada and, for this type
of industry, a world first. We believe that this trial could have major
repercussions on the free software industry around the world because, if
we come out on top, other similar actions will be taken,\" explains Mr.
Bounin, who expects the Superior Court to render a decision by the fall.
Mr. Bounin points out that using free software in a company costs more
in the short term because of employee training needs and adapting
business models, but that it becomes advantageous in the long term
because of the absence of annual licensing fees. The trial on Twitter
Created a year ago, APELL currently has five member companies, including
Sys-Tech of Quebec City. \"The number of businesses and the number of
jobs related to them could grow significantly if the Quebec government
decided to use free software,\" says Bounin. In the meantime, people
interested in the case and the future of free software in Quebec will be
able to follow the legal proceedings all week by logging on to the
social network Twitter. \"That\'s a first, too!\" says Bounin, noting
that more than 300 people have already signed up at
www.twitter.com/sflrrq to read blogger Julien Plissonneau Duquène\'s
comments live during the trial.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1133

Communication Martin Scorsese The American filmmaker will direct the
next commercial for Chanel\'s men\'s perfume, whose hero will be played
by French actor Gaspard Ulliel, Jordane Crantelle\'s partner in town,
who is responsible for celebrity communications for the luxury brand.
The young actor has notably appeared in A Very Long Engagement, a film
by Jean-Pierre Jeunet with Audrey Tautou, director and actress in the
commercial for Chanel No. 5 women\'s perfume. Marc Tessier, president of
Vidéo Futur Entertainment Group, former CEO of Canal and former
president of France Télévisions, and Marie-Louise Antoni-Lagayette,
advisor to the president of Generali France, have been appointed members
of the supervisory board of Ediradio-RTL, the company that publishes RTL
radio. Renaud Dely, until now deputy editorial director of Marianne, has
been appointed editor-in-chief at France Inter, in charge of the morning
show. Hélène Ribault has taken charge of public relations for the Euro
RSCG group in France. Energy Sébastien Loux becomes Deputy CEO of Direct
Energie, alongside the company\'s three founders, CEO Xavier Caïtucoli,
Fabien Choné and Thierry Roussel. Space Joël Barre, general engineer of
the armament, is promoted to Deputy CEO of the National Center for Space
Studies (CNES), and director of the Guiana Space Center in Kourou.
Patrice Duhamel is the new CEO of ThalesRaytheonSystems France.
Controversy Guy Verhofstadt The former Belgian Prime Minister persists
and signs. After his column on the debate on national identity,
published in Le Monde on February 11 (\"There is something rotten in the
French Republic\"), the MEP states, in a column published on February 23
by the Belgian dailies Le Soir and De Standaard, that \"Europe will be
post-national or it will not be.\" Of Bernard Kouchner, who had said
about him that \"ridicule kills a little\", he judges the \"embodied
reaction not entirely sincere, I believe, on the part of the former
founder of Doctors Without Borders, who in other times would have shown
less understanding for the government\'s thesis. But Mr. Kouchner
confirms the adage that \"the function makes the man.\" Surveillance
Vivienne Cox, a Briton, and Alexandra Schaapveld, a Dutchwoman, are
offered to join the supervisory board of the Vallourec group. Lindsay
Owen-Jones, chairman of the board of L\'Oréal, has given up his bonuses
for 2009, i.e. 900,000 euros which would have been added to his fixed
salary of 1.5 million euros. Serge Kampf, president and founder of the
IT services company Capgemini, will not receive a fixed salary in 2010.
Finance Constance de Poncins, 40, has been promoted to director of
commitments at Neuflize Vie, a life insurance and capitalization company
for the Neuflize OBC bank. IT Tangui Morlier is the new president of the
Association for the Promotion and Research in Free Software (April).
This association of 5,360 members (including 447 legal entities,
companies, associations, etc.) defends free software and fights the
Hadopi law. It will launch the Libre en fête operation at the end of
March, in partnership with the delegation for Internet usage and the
Cyberbase network of the Caisse des Dépôts.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1134

PRESS Nathalie Collin The co-chair of the board of directors of
\"Libération\" has been elected to the presidency of the Paris daily
newspaper cooperative, one of the five cooperatives of Presstalis
(ex-NMPP), replacing Bernard Villeneuve, deputy director of the
Desfossés International group. She will also sit on the Presstalis
management board, alongside other heads of daily newspaper publishers,
including David Guiraud, vice-chairman of the board of directors and
general director of the Le Monde group. IT Patrice Bertrand is the first
elected spokesperson of the National Council for Free Software (CNLL),
created by ten associations representing two hundred companies in the
free software economic sector, a market valued at 1.1 billion euros in
France in 2009. JUSTICE Anne-Elisabeth Combes becomes an associate
lawyer in the employment law department of Ernst & Young law firm. Henri
Savoie, 45, State Councilor, former collaborator of Alain Juppé at
Matignon, and Christophe Ingrain, former technical advisor in charge of
justice at the Presidency of the Republic, have joined the law firm
Darrois Villey Maillot Brochier, as associate lawyers. Michel Quéré, a
lawyer specializing in banking law, is joining the firm Lovells,
recently merged with Hogan & Hartson, as an associate. Laurence
Mitrovic, 46, a lawyer at the Paris and New York bars, is appointed
Director of Legal Affairs and Compliance at Aviva France. EUROPE Odile
Renaud-Basso, Master Advisor at the Court of Auditors, will be appointed
Deputy Head of the Office of the President of the European Council
Herman Van Rompuy. FINANCE Hugues Sibille This former advisor to Martine
Aubry at the Ministry of Employment, former interministerial delegate
for the social economy, has been appointed vice-president of Crédit
Coopératif, where he had been deputy director in charge of the social
economy and local authorities since 2005. Mr. Sibille, 58, was for a
time director of partnerships at the Caisse des Dépôts, in charge of
business creation and the social economy. He chairs Avise, the agency
for the valuation of socio-economic initiatives. Jean-François Théodore,
deputy general manager of Nyse-Euronext, becomes chairman of the
supervisory board of Mandel Partners. CITIES Xavier Lemoine, 49, mayor
(UMP) of Montfermeil, and Nathalie Appéré, 36, first deputy (PS) to the
mayor of Rennes, have been appointed vice-presidents of the National
Council of Cities, chaired by the Prime Minister. Katayoune Panahi,
technical advisor to Patrick Devedjian\'s office, is appointed general
director of Defacto, a public institution managing the La Défense
district. DEFENSE Marc Gatin, Emmanuel Chavasse-Frétaz and Arnault
Chereil de la Rivière, general controllers of the armed forces, replace
Thierry Perrin as government commissioner to, respectively, Dassault
Aviation, EADS France, Astrium SAS, MBDA France, Eurocopter, Sogepa,
Sogeade, and Défense Conseil International. CULTURE André Cardinali
takes charge of the development of the American Dance Academy in Paris.
Mr. Cardinali is also a project manager at the European Book Fair in
Dijon and the Les pépites du cinéma festival.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1135

IN ADDITION TO THE COURSES offered by the RATP Seniorcité program, it is
also possible to learn about the Internet in the provinces, in \"digital
public spaces\", associations that benefit from the \"Netpublic\" label,
and whose list is available on the website of the delegation for
Internet usage (DUI). Several municipalities, including the City of
Paris, and some universities provide training modules on new
communication tools. Companies specializing in IT also offer home
training: expect to pay 70 euros per hour at Bugbusters and 105 euros at
PC 30. The telecommunications operator Orange provides courses at 130
euros per hour, and 50% of its packages are tax deductible. In terms of
equipment, the president of the Fraternité numérique association, Brice
Alzon, suggests to his students \"the sheep policy: buy the best-selling
brands and the most common operating system, so that your grandson can
assist you remotely when you are lost,\" he recommends. For this reason,
he advises against computers specifically designed for seniors, such as
those from E-Sidor, which run on a Linux environment (software). \"Any
computer scientist can troubleshoot Linux, and we equip many retirement
homes,\" assures us at E-Sidor. Many observers believe that Internet on
mobile phones could interest seniors, if the ergonomics were up to par,
as is the case with telephony. Bazile Telecom and the manufacturer Doro
have developed a single-button telephone: the user communicates with an
operator who transfers their calls. Doro also offers a whole range of
mobile phones that are easy to use, thanks in particular to their large
buttons.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1136

The Victoria & Albert Museum, a London institution, is dedicating an
exhibition, \"Recode: Digital Design Sensations\", until April 11,
dedicated to artists (Troika, Golan Levin, Julius Popp, Rafael
Lozano-Hemmer\...) who have made computer code their material, with
generative works, others in networks and interactive installations. The
artist Karsten Schmidt was responsible for the visual identity of the
exhibition \"Recode\". The code of the work has been made available in
open source, anyone can download it and modify it to create their own
variation. They are presented in the online gallery Recode Decode. The
best of them are also broadcast on the video screens of the London
Underground throughout the duration of the exhibition. Among the lucky
ones, the version of the Austrian artist Lia, those of Henner Wöhler or
Joe Turner, to discover online. Www.vam.ac.uk/microsites
/decode/recodegallery

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1137

Last December, the billion mark was passed. A billion of what? Internet
users. It is a considerable event that has almost gone unnoticed. There
are now more than a billion men and women who, with the Internet,
exchange, invent, inform and inform themselves, trade, buy or sell,
\"share their intelligence\", as Professor Khayat said here last week,
about cancer research. But there are also those who swarm and pollute,
liars and fantasists, pornographers and revisionists, spreading their
horrors and slogans, vengeful fanatics, organized terrorists (al-Qaeda
uses the Internet to the full), propagators of every imaginable excess.
(It was because she had seen images of the idiotic \"scarf game\" on the
Internet that a young Marie T. accidentally hanged herself with her judo
belt in her bedroom in Quimper.) \"Googling\" The Web - it\'s the same
word, and it has the same meaning, that of an infinite network, a
virtual field, without limits, and almost without laws - has created
another universe, both in ours - the real one - and next to it, so that
\"the earth is flat\", according to the formula of the American
journalist Thomas L. Friedman. We know all this, no doubt, and we know
the irresistible increase in the power of Google, this very rich company
that has only existed for twelve years and which allows, in a little
over half a second, to deliver practically any answer to practically any
question - to the point that the verb \"googling\" has entered everyday
language. You are not looking for information. You Google. Yes, we
probably know all this, and perhaps I am just stating some obvious facts
that you already know. But I wanted to address these topics on the
occasion of new statistics published by ComScore. They were provided to
me by a \"techie\" friend who is surprised, sometimes with irony, even
sadness - as my children do - by my relatively meager and still
incomplete mastery of the Internet - my clumsiness in \"surfing\" the
Web. - In a way, he says, the count of the number of Internet users by
country gives an accurate picture of the world today. The largest number
of Internet users is in China (179 million), followed by the USA (163
million), Japan (60 million), Germany, the United Kingdom, France (34
million) and India (32 million). France, which has 64 million
inhabitants, is therefore \"Internet user\" for half of its population.
That\'s a good rank. - India, with 1.3 billion inhabitants, is only
number seven in the world? Is that normal? - It\'s simply a question of
equipment. You\'ll notice the absence of Africa and the Middle East.
Only 49 million users in these two parts of the world, one of which,
Africa, is a continent. But there again, it\'s only a question of time
and equipment, and this disparity will diminish one day. What will
happen when the third and fourth worlds have access, under the same
conditions as us, to the Internet? I don\'t know. Nobody knows. As with
everything, by the way! It\'s a difficult notion to accept, but we must
understand that the virtual world is never finished. When he remade his
\"walking man\" dozens of times, Giacometti decided one day that he was
finished. Even if he was not - like any artist - satisfied with his
sculpture, he had to put an end to his work. Well, we must know that the
virtual world is endless - like space. NASA sent man to the Moon
forty-one years ago, thanks to computers whose entire energy, today,
could fit into a single chip, or almost! In a few years, there will be
no more computers. They will be in our bodies. Power of ideas My friend
then encourages me to look on the Web for a demonstration recently made
during a TED conference. What is this new acronym? T for Technique, E
for Entertainment, D for Design. I find out and summarize: it is an
organization dedicated to \"the power of ideas in the world\" - and
which brings together, in one or two annual meetings, fifty people from
all disciplines who are entitled to eighteen minutes, no more, to
present their new idea. It takes place in California and you have to pay
\$6,000 to get in to listen to speakers on art, science, architecture,
ecology, politics, etc. Paradoxically, TED then makes the results of the
talks available to Internet users for free on its website. So I
\"surfed\" (www.ted.com/talks) and watched the incredible \"tinkering\"
presented by an Indian researcher, a certain Pranav Mistry, who is
finishing his doctorate at MIT, a playful, smiling, and astonishingly
ingenious young man. - Already, my technophile points out, we can say
that Pranav Mistry represents today\'s world. He is Indian and he
studies in the USA. He is \"global\". He has tinkered with a system that
allows us to do without a computer; he invented a tiny, intuitive
camera, hanging from his neck, and in which he put all the intelligence
of his computer and connected it to the two fingers of each of his
hands, equipped with a sort of electronic dice and his fingers replace
the \"mouse\" (the famous \"field mouse\" that Chirac had not been able
to master!) and can project, on any surface, on your shirt, on a wall,
an image or information. In short, he demonstrates that, soon, man will
no longer need an interface to communicate. He will develop a \"sixth
sense\" that will free the machine from his body, the two becoming one.
\"Open source\" I am getting a bit lost, but am fascinated by watching
Pranav Mistry and the ovation he gets from the audience. I learn that
the practice of the TED conference is multiplying. Thus, on January 30,
in Paris, at the Espace Cardin, 700 people listened for five hours to
psychologists, historians, biotherapists, strategy consultants and other
cosmologists. The press did not say a word about it - even less so the
\"8pm\" news. But it did not escape Internet users: \"Certainly, the
Internet can convey Evil - do not forget that Google has adopted as its
motto \"Don\'t be evil\" - but it can also be an \"open source\" (that
is the term used), an \"open source\" that will advance, by pooling
ideas and innovations.\" Interesting detail: one of the spectators of
this TED conference in Paris concluded on his blog: \"I spent a
hair-raising and stimulating afternoon. We did not hear, once, the word
\"crisis\"! This sentence alone says a lot: there are indeed two worlds.
The virtual one, which we hope is virtuous. The real one, from everyday
life, which suffers and worries. Could the virtual relieve the real? The
Internet as an antidote to our poisons? We must not dream. The
\"elites\" of the inter-national government will not be able to replace
those who patiently fight against cruel reality. But we can also hope
that dozens of Pranav Mistrys will come and invent balms for all our
wounds. Abellio said: \"The world will be saved by a few.\" Do these
\"few\" inhabit the Web? plabro@lefigaro.fr

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1138

\"Fuck Google\". The workshop\'s theme has the advantage of being clear.
On the occasion of the Transmediale, a digital art festival last week in
Berlin (and of which Google was one of the sponsors), the turbulent FAT
Lab tried to raise awareness among Internet users about the Google
octopus. An informal network bringing together about twenty artists,
musicians and hackers, FAT (Free Art and Technology) campaigns for free
culture, open technologies by developing projects, preferably wacky and
very first degree. \"We try to interest the youngest in free culture, by
speaking their language, by using viral videos. To give a cool and (hip)
pop image of open source and collaborative practices\", says Evan Roth,
also founder of the Graffiti Research Lab. This international club of
geeks usually meets online, chatting on IRC to define a theme that they
have fun declining in the form of software, extensions, games, parody
videos. Rapper Kanye West\'s repeated scandals gave rise, for example,
to a KANYWEBST. For a week, participants were required to express
themselves only in capital letters (a very rude way of \"SHOUTING\" on
the Web) and to propose 2.0 tools that ridicule the pop star. For
example, this program that tweets at each new outburst of anger or this
extension that allows you to see the Web through your striped glasses.
In the role of the bad guy, Google is the ideal client. The
multinational that owns more than 150 domains, dozens of web
applications, a search engine and some of the most popular sites has
become essential. FAT wants to raise awareness of this
\"Google-ification of the Internet\" and the issue of the personal data
that we trust it with. FuckGoogle is a collection of extensions, open
source software and direct actions created to draw attention to the role
that Google plays in our everyday lives. \"Don\'t get me wrong,\" writes
Aram Bartholl, \"We too use Google, Gmail, YouTube, its calendars,
documents, maps, etc. We use them like public toilets when we have to
pee; because it seems there is no other option. But there are
alternatives.\" A contemporary Pythia, Google has the answer to
everything. So we can trust \"Dr. Google\" to diagnose the illness you
are suffering from: just enter your symptoms in the query bar. Evan Roth
hijacks a film where a skinny black guy (playing YOU) gets his bike
stolen (playing \"your content\") by a big guy (playing Google). \"Get
your business back!\" concludes the clip with this slogan \"Web 3.0: the
great retreat to your own servers.\" Among other heroic actions: showing
your butt to the Google Street View car on the prowl in Berlin.
Currently in development is a \"Google Air Horn\" plug-in, a siren that
will sound every time you are on a website using a Google service, in
order to provoke a Pavlovian reflex or make you deaf forever.
Http://fffff.at

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1139

Ready to go to war against global warming? Coalition of the Willing is a
collaborative animated film that aims to remobilize activists after the
failure of the Copenhagen summit. Since it now seems certain that our
world leaders are not going to move heaven and earth to save the planet,
all that remains is to do it ourselves. To remotivate the troops,
nothing beats a well-crafted little (counter-)propaganda film,
illustrating counter-attack strategies (open source, collaboration,
crowd politics, etc.). The film is made by 20 artists who will each
animate a part of the script, put online in several waves over six
weeks. The first four excerpts are available. The initiator of this
project is Knife Party, aka Simon Robson, author of the
multi-award-winning animation What Barry Says , which criticized the
American invasion of Iraq. Http://coalitionofthewilling.org.uk

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1140

Freewheeling radio station WFMU, broadcasting from New Jersey and on the
Web, launched the Free Music Archive in April, a resource for
high-quality free music that can be streamed or downloaded for free.
Inspired by Creative Commons and the open source movement, the FMA
provides a legal framework for artists and their audiences to facilitate
the sharing of music. The tracks here are carefully selected by experts
in their field, from 8-bit to old folk, from hip-hop to sound poetry.
Among them is Excavated Shellac, a 78-rpm specialist, which offers
plenty of rarities, vernacular music from around the world. Other audio
curiosities include the radio show Phoning in , where DJ
TYalksonthephone phones musicians who are playing live on the end of the
receiver. Http://freemusicarchive.org

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1141

The man behind the Linux operating system, Linus Torvalds, has probably
made some people happy at Google. He recently claimed on his blog that
he loves the new Nexus One. The Google phone was unveiled in January. It
is the first phone to bear the Google logo and runs on the search
giant\'s open-source mobile operating system, Android. \"I generally
hate cell phones - they are annoying and distract you when you are
working, reading, or whatever - and a cell phone is just an opportunity
for me to be disturbed wherever you are. Which is not a good thing,\"
the famous programmer wrote. However, he says that Google\'s phone has
just changed his mind. \"I was not keen on buying a phone online without
seeing it first, but the day they announced pinch-to-zoom (multi-touch)
I decided to take the plunge,\" Torvalds wrote. Google\'s Android
operating system is based on the Linux system kernel.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1142

Peter Sunde, aka Brokep, aka Mr. Co-Founder of The Pirate Bay, has just
launched the test phase of Flattr, a social micro-payment system
designed to facilitate online financing of creation. Not exactly a grand
launch, just a short sentence, \"This is #flattr\", posted on the
micro-blogging site Twitter, to introduce a very educational video (in
English). The principle: each Flattr user pays a fixed amount each
month, for example 3 euros. When surfing, on a blog, on a musician\'s
site or on a photographer\'s gallery, he can click on a Flattr button if
he wants to give a part of his contribution. This button would appear in
the same way as the Digg, Twitter or Facebook buttons that are almost
everywhere on the Net today. At the end of the month, if the Internet
user has clicked on a Flattr button ten times, each creator will receive
a tenth of the amount. The explanatory video concludes with: \"It\'s the
small streams that make the big rivers.\" The concept of Flattr does not
come out of nowhere. It is directly inspired by the idea of global
sponsorship imagined by Francis Muguet and Richard Stallman. The only
difference is that in the context of global sponsorship, the monthly
charge is fixed and mandatory. It remains to be seen whether a system
based on volunteering will be able to work on a large scale. Everything
has to start somewhere. Http://flattr.com/beta/

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1143

Saint-Médard-en-Jalles, on the outskirts of Bordeaux, 30,000
inhabitants. Four out of five at signs in the Villes Internet ranking,
the Michelin guide for the most Web-friendly municipalities.
Neighborhood blogs, a well-established e-administration, Internet
initiations for seniors\... Like Saint-Médard-en-Jalles, the Internet
simplifies the management of municipalities, brings elected officials
closer to residents and residents together. Half rural, half urban,
Saint-Médard is quite representative of these local authorities
connected to the global network for the benefit of the very local. Its
\"humus\" lends itself to this, which combines an extensive forest area
and several cutting-edge industries. The mayor (Serge Lamaison, PS), his
deputies and the municipal executives are imbued with an unwavering
faith in the virtues of digital technology. Serge Larrous, the general
director of services, reads Le Monde on his iPhone and, like his
colleagues, swears by free software, which is less expensive and more
\"open\" than Microsoft tools. At the forefront of communication
technologies, Saint-Médard-en-Jalles proudly proclaims this quality of
\"free city\" from any dependence on Internet giants. Free and eager to
free itself from paperwork. Four thousand families now pay online for
canteen fees and their registration for a sports club. Those who are not
yet in the habit are asked to go through digital counters for their
administrative procedures. It is less annoying than queuing at the town
hall. Association managers can book municipal halls online. Residents
benefit, if they wish, from an address in \"\...@stmedard.fr\"\... In a
word, Saint-Médard-en-Jalles wants to be a laboratory for digital living
together. Its computer scientists are working on a 3D representation of
the city, in the style of Second Life. The first buildings - the town
hall, a swimming pool, etc. - have already emerged from the ground, so
to speak. Soon, residents will be able to walk around from their homes
and click on the information panels that will mark their route: opening
hours, emergency numbers, media library catalogues, etc. Caught up in
this digital whirlwind, the people of Saint-Médard have become
demanding. One in ten citizens is deprived of access to the Internet due
to a lack of adequate infrastructure - housing is very dispersed - and
they do not tolerate it well. \"At neighbourhood meetings,\" says one
elected official, Jacques Guichoux, \"people ask us when they will have
the Internet. A bit like they used to ask for running water and
electricity. \"Those who have access to the Web have a meticulous
relationship with citizenship,\" explains Stéphan Pelletier, the deputy
mayor in charge of local democracy: \"They bombard us with emails on the
most varied subjects to which they often expect an immediate response.\"
Reducing the \"digital divide\" is on the agenda in Saint-Médard. In
2009, the media library\'s introductory workshops trained a thousand
people, young and old, in how to use the Internet. A \"cyber-base\",
where job seekers can come and write a CV, a cover letter or consult
company offers, completes this system. You can familiarize yourself with
office automation, play online, create a blog\... The neighborhood
blogs, of which there are three, spread local micro-news to every home:
on January 29, the West sociocultural association, Asco, organized a
bingo game in the Georges-Brassens hall. The planet did not stop turning
that night. But this cyber-citizenship strengthens citizenship in
general. In 2007, more than 90% of Saint-Médard-en-Jalle voters voted in
the presidential election. As a reward, the city received the Marianne
of civic-mindedness. Its tropism for the Internet and its four at-signs
certainly have something to do with it.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1144

How to convert a Word file to PDF? Mac users do not need to install
anything. Using the print command in Word (and any other application),
they simply click on the PDF button and then choose whether to save the
document as a PDF, fax it or send it directly by email. With Windows,
the situation is different. If you are using Microsoft Office 2007, you
can download the program SaveAsPDFandXPS.exe for free from the Microsoft
website. Once installed on your PC, this extension adds a new menu that
allows you to export and save files in PDF (and XPS) format in Office
2007 applications. With older versions of Word, you have to use external
software. Several commercial products are available, such as Adobe
Acrobat (417 euros) or Abbyy PDF Transformer (65 euros). The simplest,
PDFCreator, has the advantage of being free. It is an open source
software that simulates a printer. Once this program is installed,
activate the Print function of Word, then choose PDFCreator from the
printers menu. Then click Save to convert the document to PDF format and
save it on your hard drive. An alternative is to download and install
the OpenOffice.org software suite, which works like Microsoft Office,
and produces PDF files directly. Nothing more to add: you have a word
processor, a spreadsheet, a presentation software and a database
manager. All documents can thus be saved in PDF format.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1145

SHERBROOKE - Newfoundland researchers working on a system that would
allow unmanned vehicles to avoid obstacles in flight have signed an
agreement with students from the Université de Sherbrooke\'s Véhicule
aérienne miniature group (VAMUdeS). The Sherbrooke expertise will make
the Memorial University scientists\' research less costly. Currently,
explains François Bolduc-Teasdale, a mechanical engineering student and
member of VAMUdeS, unmanned aerial vehicles are designed to travel from
point A to point B, so they do not detect obstacles along the way.
Researchers from the Raven project in Newfoundland are particularly
interested in the Arctic, where they hope unmanned aircraft could carry
out long missions, for example in unpatrolled areas. One phase of the
project involves obstacle avoidance by aerial vehicles. Most planes have
radars, but they won\'t detect a self-piloted aerial vehicle, notes Éric
Demers, an electrical engineering student and member of the group. The
VAMUdeS group designs unmanned surveillance vehicles. \"The goal of the
group is to develop this type of vehicle to meet the needs of
industry,\" explains François Teasdale-Bolduc. It was during a
competition in New Brunswick that the Sherbrooke students met the
Newfoundland researchers. Subsequently, François Bolduc-Teasdale and his
classmate Simon Jobin, also a member of the group, went to St. John\'s
last August to show their self-piloted prototype to the Raven project
team. The team was reportedly particularly impressed by the flexibility
of the Sherbrooke students\' self-piloting system. Crash tests \"The
system used is inexpensive and if it breaks, it can be repaired quickly.
With our system, we can do crash tests without it costing a lot of
money,\" explained the two students, whose prototype wings are about a
metre and a half long. The researchers from the Canadian island were
also interested in the fact that the students were inspired by the
Paparazzi open-source technology, which also facilitates their research.
The agreement with the Newfoundland researchers was signed in January.
The latter ordered two autopilots from the Sherbrooke group to carry out
their tests. In addition to working on this project, the students would
like to take part in two major competitions, one in Maryland next June
and another in Australia, the date of which has not yet been announced.
VAMUdeS is also looking for sponsors. isabelle.pion@latribune.qc.ca

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1146

Between Molson Street and Jean-Duceppe Park, there is a huge 400,000
square foot lot. The "most beautiful piece of land" owned by the Société
de développement Angus (SDA), according to Christian Yaccarini,
president and CEO of the non-profit organization. And it's no
coincidence that it's still vacant. "For years, we've dreamed of
developing this land, but we wanted to wait until we were experienced
enough to be able to push further what we've always wanted to do in
Angus. We're there," Mr. Yaccarini told Le Devoir. Some 850,000 square
feet of rental space can be built there. "It's huge," he added. "And
now, we can really do something innovative. We've given ourselves until
June to think about it, to come up with a vision, without stopping
ourselves from dreaming for the moment because of budgetary or urban
planning constraints." But what is there to think about? In fact, since
this project is expected to span a period of 10 years, it will not be
completed before 2020. \"Things are moving so quickly in the world of
work, with the advancement of technologies, that we wonder how society
will function in 2020, 2030, 2040 and even 2050. What will its needs
be?\" asks Christian Yaccarini. And that\'s without forgetting the
ecological concerns that will come to the fore. The idea of bringing the
workplace and living environment closer together is therefore a priority
for the SDA. \"In 20 years, will people still be leaving the suburbs to
come and work in Montreal? Will large parking lots still be relevant?
\"I\'m not sure,\" says the CEO, who already knows about thirty workers
on the Technopôle Angus grounds who have bought a house or condo in the
area and now walk to work. In addition, with all the technologies that
are being developed, will workers really need to physically go to their
office from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m., five days a week? And will there always be
more self-employed workers? \"Before, people became self-employed
because they lost their jobs. Now, it\'s a choice! However, that
doesn\'t mean that these people always want to work while being isolated
at home and meeting their clients in their kitchen,\" notes Mr.
Yaccarini. And there\'s the whole work-life balance issue, with shared
custody situations on the rise. \"What will work-life balance mean in
2020?\" wonders Mr. Yaccarini. These are the kinds of questions the SDA
team is trying to answer. To do this, three committees have been formed,
internally and externally, to better understand where society is going
and what the next major changes will be. Sociologists of work are
involved, as are researchers linked to research chairs in sustainable
development and open source software, people who work for the
development of new technologies, but also people from the population and
more particularly young people. \"Because, let\'s be realistic,\" says
Mr. Yaccarini. \"I\'m 51 years old. We\'re not developing this project
for people of my generation. It\'s young people who will benefit from
it.\" Mixed-use buildings We can already identify a few elements that
emerge from this major reflection that began a few years ago. First,
we\'re talking about mixed-use buildings. \"We won\'t build row houses
and, further down, a commercial rental building. We are leaning more
towards buildings that would include, for example, condos, different
types of workspaces for businesses and rooms for self-employed workers
with local businesses on the ground floor,\" explains Mr. Yaccarini. He
sees this central island as a very urban and very dense space that will
not empty after 5 p.m. Several multifunctional buildings would therefore
be built on the land next to the park. One would have a cultural
vocation and another, which would probably be the first to be built, by
2013, would be dedicated to sustainable development. \"It would be a
kind of centre of excellence in sustainable development, in which we
would try to facilitate the transfer of thinking about sustainable
development to practice. Because there is still a lot to do in the
field,\" says the man who is working with the École Polytechnique on the
project. This building would therefore house conference rooms and even a
hotel. \"In the East, there is no place where we can host conferences,\"
notes the developer. And, of course, we always talk about LEED buildings
and innovation. \"There\'s no question of repeating what we\'re used to
doing,\" he adds. \"We want to try new things. It\'s very stimulating.\"
The development of the central island represents a major investment for
the SDA. For the moment, it\'s about \$140 million. \*\*\* Contributor
to Le Devoir

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1147

To mark the 20th anniversary of the World Wide Web, BBC Two is
broadcasting the first part of a four-part documentary on the history of
the Web this Saturday. The \"old lady\" has given itself a 2.0 facelift
by experimenting with a new form of \"open and collaborative\"
documentary on the way the Internet is changing our lives. Throughout
the production of Digital Revolution (working title) which began on July
10, Internet users were invited to participate in its development, since
\"the Web is people, people connected by computers\", as Jay Rosen, a
specialist in citizen journalism, points out. \"It would be stupid to
make a documentary about the Web without involving those who were named
by the Times as the 2006 Person of the Year, \"YOU\", \"explains the
BBC. The team wanted to open up the production process \"as much as
possible\", communicating in all directions with Internet users via a
blog and all the paraphernalia at their disposal (Twitter, Delicious,
Flickr, YouTube). And this at all stages of production. A simple
marketing ploy to capture an audience, or a real consideration of
contributions? \"It is wrong to think that a participatory documentary
can do without an author\'s vision,\" tempers Dan Gluckman, one of the
producers. Our ambition has never been to integrate lots of extracts
filmed by a crowd of people or to write the script with multiple hands.
We are \"open source\" in the sense that we give access to our sources:
our debates on the themes of the program, our online research, our
rushes. It is possible to involve an Audience in multiple ways. And in
my experience, people prefer to participate in a specific framework
rather than being faced with a blank page.\" During preproduction,
Internet users were able to send their links, images, comments,
suggestions and stories intended to fuel reflection. They were invited
to debate with web personalities (\"Is the blogosphere dead?\" \"Is
Wikipedia elitist?\" \"Does Google make you stupid?\"), to submit
questions to web stars. The rushes filmed by BBC reporters were made
available as they were produced, raw extracts from the interviews. The
cast is prestigious but expected: Chris Anderson from Wired magazine,
Steve Wozniak, co-founder of Apple, Tim Berners Lee, the father of the
web, but also Daniel Schmitt, from Wikileaks, a site that publishes
confidential documents, or the sociologist Danah Boyd, one of the rare
women. These rushes could be commented on, downloaded, shared, remixed,
according to a license inspired by Creative Commons. \"Internet users
will be able to edit their version of the documentary, tell their own
vision of this digital revolution with these images,\" writes Dan
Biddle, in charge of hosting the blog. They were invited to express
their creativity in a competition of short films and trailers, as well
as to the \"namestorm\" on the final title of the documentary which will
result in this sadly banal The Virtual Revolution. In addition to the
classic linear documentary intended for the BBC, the project is also
expected to be declined in an interactive form. The first chapter on the
counter-cultural roots of the Web is broadcast this Saturday evening at
8pm on BBC Two and will be exceptionally available worldwide on iplayer.
Www.bbc.co.uk/digitalrevolution www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1148

What is the role of a festival in the digital age? For a few years now,
the Rotterdam Film Festival (IFFR), which opens today, has been
struggling with this nagging question. For this 39th edition, it is
launching a new initiative, Cinema Reloaded (Cinemareloaded.com/en):
three short film projects directed by independent directors subsidized
by Internet users. Faced with the pessimism of the film industry, which
fears suffering the same scourge as the record industry, the IFFR wants
to show its faith in the future, if not of the industry, at least of
independent cinema. \"Never have we listened to so much music, half the
planet has an MP3 player or a smartphone. The same effect is foreseeable
for cinema, with greater access to films and a wider choice,\" says the
press release. In addition to lower production costs, free and easy
access to distribution and marketing means, \"the most exciting thing
for those who love cinema is that the Internet offers a chance to bridge
the gap between the director and his audience.\" Process. With this new
project, the IFFR claims to put \"the active audience\" at the heart of
the future of film. Evil tongues will say that it is above all a way to
pick the pockets of the Internet user since the bulk of his
\"participation\" is limited to co-financing his favorite film. He will
have the possibility of buying coins (minimum 5 dollars, or 3.50 euros)
on the dedicated website and investing them in the short of his choice
(with a budget of 30,000 euros). He will not be able to intervene in the
creative process of the directors (the Argentinian Alexis Dos Santos,
the Malaysian Ho Yuhang and the Swiss artist Pipilotti Rist) nor hope
for a return on investment. In exchange for this donation, he will be
able to follow the film\'s progress via the director\'s blog, see the
film\'s premiere on video on demand (VOD), have his name in the credits
(provided he pays at least \$25) and be invited to the premiere in
theaters (depending on the number of seats available). Nothing very
revolutionary in short, \"crowdfunding\" initiatives are proliferating
on web 2.0, whether it is to finance a film, a video game, a
documentary, an album (Indiegogo, Kickstarter, Touscoprod,
Peopleforcinema\...). Some \"open source\" films (A Swarm of Angel or El
Cosmonaut) go further in involving the viewer, who can participate as an
extra, assistant, composer. The festivals that could have been the place
for the revival of independent cinema are lagging behind. For the new
director of the IFFR, Rutger Wolfson, Cinema Reloaded is an
\"experiment\" that he hopes will be rich in lessons and that will give
rise to a report. \"This project is not intended to find a definitive
business model, but to fuel reflection.\" \"Idiot.\" Another avenue that
has been cautiously explored is instant distribution. Until January 31,
the Sundance festival is experimenting with alternative distribution
methods for the first time. Sundance Selects, its VOD service available
on American cable, is offering three films, the documentary The Shock
Doctrine, the autobiographical comedy Daddy Longlegs and the thriller 7
Days, on the day of their premiere in theaters to 40 million homes for a
month. The mecca of American independent cinema no longer wants to be
just the must-see event for professionals but to reach the public
directly, wherever they may be. A crucial condition for independent
filmmakers. Hollywood contracts have become a rare commodity. Most of
the major studios have withdrawn from the independent scene. In 2008,
less than half of the films presented at Sundance were honored on the
big screen. \"Festivals themselves are going to become part of a film\'s
distribution strategy. We\'re going to see a lot of films in the future
that are going to jump straight into distribution and use the festival
as a launch pad,\" says new director John Cooper. Whether in cooperation
with the festival or on their own initiative, several producers are
experimenting with immediate distribution. Rather than hoping to sell
their film in a saturated market, they\'re hoping to use the festival\'s
buzz to find an audience. For example, Linas Philips\'s Volkswagen truck
road movie Bass Ackwards will be available on VOD in the United States
as soon as the festival closes. The film is selected in a new section,
NEXT, dedicated to low- and no-budget films. \"Our film only cost
\$30,000, so we can take the risk of doing something totally stupid that
goes against the grain,\" says producer Thomas Woodrow in a video posted
on YouTube. The feature film is also one of the five films offered by
YouTube in partnership with Sundance, on its new VOD service (for 4
dollars). An offer that is ultimately very poor, valid only during the
festival and in the United States, even if the online video platform has
expressed its wish to become on the Net the new channel for independent
films in need of distribution, where directors will be able to set the
price and rental conditions while retaining their rights. To be
continued.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1149

Richard Stallman has identified the four essential freedoms that define
free software: the freedom to run the program for any purpose; the
freedom to study how it works, and to adapt it; the freedom to
redistribute copies, and the freedom to improve the program and publish
these improvements. These are the pillars of a movement that has changed
computing. On January 21, Richard Stallman and the Free Software
Revolution (1), the French version of a biography by Sam Williams,
published in 2002, will be released. At the request of the Framasoft
association, Stallman himself participated in the update. This genius
has spent more than a quarter of a century fighting for his convictions,
paying close attention to his words. For example, he uses \"privateur\"
to describe software that others call \"proprietary\", to emphasize the
fact that it deprives users of their freedom. Meeting with obligatory
informality, at his request. You participated in your own biography,
what was your state of mind? I had never read the first final edition.
When I was asked to intervene on the French translation, I accepted. But
a lot of changes were needed. It was delicate, I didn\'t want to lose
Sam Williams\' point of view. So I decided to keep all the quotes,
except a few that had nothing to do with me, and to preserve all the
author\'s personal impressions. By correcting many other things. Do you
think that free software would exist without your action? No. There
would perhaps be a few free programs. But today we have free operating
systems, it is possible to do computing normally without any proprietary
software. And that is the result of the movement that I launched in
1983. Today, free software has a very important place. But our movement
has not won. The goal is the liberation of all users. And the majority
continues to use Windows or Macintosh, two proprietary operating
systems, therefore unfair. The use of free software by the greatest
number does not seem to be your priority\... That\'s true. I want
everyone to be free. But is it more important to convince a few people
to use free software, or to educate more people to value their freedom?
To have the basis for lasting freedom, you have to educate people to
demand this freedom. The world offers many opportunities to lose it. And
if you don\'t see why to resist, you accept them. I fight to educate
users to appreciate freedom. To no longer accept proprietary software.
The majority does not see the problem, does not see the difference,
because they have never imagined the idea of being free. You have to be
able to tell the difference. An example? If the four essential freedoms
are not there, the developer exercises control over the use. He can do
what he wants. He can put harmful elements in his program to monitor
you, to impose limits on you\... We have discovered backdoors in major
proprietary programs, such as Microsoft Windows, or Amazon Kindle. What
are the major advances in recent years? Office programs, for example,
are good and widely used. Graphical interfaces also work well. Some
states and regions are migrating their institutions and schools to free
software. So we have had significant advances, even if we have not yet
won. The early fight over free software and sharing has now shifted to
content\... I don\'t like the word content for works of art, it
depreciates them. This word assumes that the works are not important,
that they are used to fill a box with anything. Sharing is fraternity,
and it is everyone\'s right to share exact copies of published works, if
it is not commercial. Sharing must be legalized, including on the
Internet. Any law to prohibit it is unjust and has no moral authority.
Hadopi is a tyrannical law! I am in favor of helping artists, but in a
way that is adapted to the network. The current system is not working
well: a few stars earn a lot and the majority earn almost nothing. I
proposed establishing a tax that would be distributed, but not in a
linear way. Stars would earn more than others, but in more reasonable
proportions. What do you think of all those who consider that you have
too rigid a personality? It is easy, for someone who has no principles
and is willing to sell anything, to consider others as rigid. (1)
Editions Eyrolles, 22 euros.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1150

If proof were needed of the unpopularity of finance, Le Débat
(November-December) provides it beyond all expectations. This journal,
edited by Marcel Gauchet, a usually level-headed intellectual, publishes
five articles on the \"post-crisis\" that some might consider to be as
many scathing articles more at home in Alternatives économiques than at
Gallimard. Three are new - that of the economist and anthropologist Paul
Jorion (well known to readers of \"Le Monde Economie\") on the \"exit
from capitalism\", that of the economist Jean-Luc Gréau \"for a new
banking system\", and the very interesting but slightly offbeat
reflection of Michel Volle, a specialist in economic history, on the
consequences of computerization on finance and even beyond. Two
contributions are translations: a famous article, published in the
spring in The Atlantic, by Simon Johnson, former head of the
International Monetary Fund (IMF), entitled \"Coup d\'état en douce\"
and, finally, that of Geoff Mulgan, a close friend of Tony Blair, on
\"after capitalism\". Common point to the five authors: no one believes
that the crisis was only temporary. On the contrary, for all, it more or
less calls into question the functioning of capitalism or more precisely
the system that we thought we knew and called liberalism. Simon
Johnson\'s article, comparing the fate of American bankers and the fate
of Russian oligarchs or large Thai families, victims of the passage of
the International Monetary Fund in their country, is devastating. Like
him, Paul Jorion returns to one of the characteristics of the Obama plan
to rescue the banks: in all cases, the administration chose the option
most advantageous to Wall Street. Both authors believe that the banking
system owes its survival only to public intervention and that it is
therefore, in fact, nationalized. But where Johnson sees it as a
political choice, Jorion believes that there was no alternative.
Similarly, the latter analyzes in detail the reform of the banks\'
balance sheets, a change that went unnoticed during the G20 in London
but was decisive for the sector\'s return to good fortune. With Jean-Luc
Gréau, the reader is invited to delve into the toolbox of this maverick
who rightly notes that central banks are no longer the lenders of last
resort to commercial banks but the lenders of first resort, which
amounts, he says, to a \"de facto nationalization of the credit
system\". We are not obliged to follow him when he recommends placing
central banks under the supervision of the States, but his proposal to
prohibit operations carried out by banks on their own account and his
presentation of the responses that Maurice Allais would provide to the
crisis are very stimulating. The fact that one of Tony Blair\'s minds is
announcing to us, with rejoicing, the end of capitalism confirms that
the situation is serious! \"Just as the monarchical idea has become
marginal, capitalism will lose its influence on our society and our
culture. From master, it will become servant,\" he predicts, relying on
the successes of Wikipedia, free software, cooperatives, etc. Mixing
technology and foresight, this dossier complements that of the Esprit
magazine (in November), more devoted to macroeconomics. Those who
consider these challenges to capitalism excessive will delve into
Sociétal (1st quarter) from the Institut de l\'entreprise, whose subject
is: \"After the crisis, a new era of liberalism?\" A bold angle in these
times.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1151

I swear, in 2010, I will not leave traces everywhere on the Web, which
identify me for sure, say my tastes, my travel plans, my political
opinions, who I hang out with\... Who say me. If she had followed this
wise advice, Stacy Snyder, a 25-year-old American, would be a teacher
today. With her degree in hand, she was waiting for a posting when,
bang!, the administration said no. By reproaching her for her
inappropriate behavior. A few months earlier, Stacy had put a photo of
herself on MySpace, a sea dog hat on her head, a plastic cup in her
hand, with this caption: \"The drunken pirate\". Her friends had found
it funny. Not the university authorities. Her, a teacher? What an
example for students! Viktor Mayer-Schönberger tells this story in
Delete (Princeton University Press, 2009), a brilliant essay devoted to
the dangers that everyone runs when exposing themselves on the Internet.
Delete: throw away everything that identifies you. This is the friendly
advice that this American researcher, a specialist in the right to be
forgotten, gives to Internet users, his peers. There is work to be done:
many Internet users are more inclined to exhibition than to discretion.
They give themselves a pseudonym to \"chat\" on a political forum but do
not hesitate to publish photos of themselves partying on their Facebook
page. Unconsciously or ignorantly, only a minority use the
confidentiality parameters that social networks make available to them.
61% of Facebook users make themselves visible to everyone, whereas with
a click, they could reserve the most personal part of themselves only to
their loved ones. A discussion is underway within the government, led by
Nathalie Kosciusko-Morizet, to better protect the anonymity, so
overused, of Internet users. In a few days, the State Secretariat for
the Digital Economy will open a site where Internet users can \"post\"
their thoughts on the subject. In Libération, the minister has already
put forward an interesting idea, that of a label that would be
attributed to each site according to the degree of protection it offers
to Internet users. Anyone who goes to an adult address must be able to
do so anonymously. Conversely, on Impots.gouv.fr, the identity of the
Internet user must correspond exactly to their civil status. The idea is
interesting, but there are others. In Delete, Viktor Mayer-Schönberger
proposes assigning an expiration date to all documents that Internet
users store on their hard drive. A right of amnesia often synonymous
with amnesty. All this is well and good, but the time it takes for the
Internet regulatory authorities to agree on a solution, for Microsoft
and Google to follow suit, for every operator in the world to play the
game\... It will take years. In the meantime, I have resolved, for 2010,
to travel masked on the Net. I cover my tracks by arming myself with a
false identity whenever possible (I don\'t go to Impots.gouv.fr every
day). I adopt Tor, a free software that sends data across the Web in a
random trajectory and thus erases traces of my browsing. I click on the
Google Dashboard, a page where all the sites I have visited, via the
search engine, over the years are listed. There, I see that on September
4, 2006, at 9:08 p.m., I connected to the SNCF site (why?). I check the
\"delete web history\" option. This way, no one will know that on
January 1, 2010 at 2:37 in the morning, I was consulting
Nostradamus.com. I teach my family, especially the youngest, not to
expose themselves thoughtlessly on Facebook or MySpace. To \"anonymize\"
themselves. To be responsible Internet users. Because their private life
is also a bit mine.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1152

A \"googol\", in mathematics, corresponds to the number 10 to the power
of 100, or a 1 followed by one hundred zeros. According to legend, this
misspelled word is the origin of another word: Google, perhaps the most
famous of this decade, precisely\... the zero years. The term is much
more complex. It first designates a flourishing globalized company with
nearly 20,000 employees posting, in 2008, a profit of more than 4
billion dollars (2.8 billion euros). All thanks to a search engine that
has taken over half of the global market for ten years. A business whose
growth limits no one can measure. Because the fabulous profits generated
by the multinational have always been used as a launch platform for a
multitude of other software products. A dazzling expansion, in its speed
and scale, which has left many competitors behind: Yahoo, AOL,
Ask.com\... However, despite the feeling of omnipresence that it gives
off, Google has only recently arrived in our lives. Founded in 1998 by
Larry Page and Sergey Brin, two young geniuses from Stanford University,
the company has developed at high speed since 2000. Its triumph is based
on the strategic choice of inventing a search engine that analyzes the
intersections and affinities between the sites themselves and their own
links rather than the number of times the search term appears on a page.
Brin and Page developed the ideal algorithm to serve this intuition. And
the confirmation that they had hit the mark was not long in coming.
Firstly by the relevance of the results obtained, but above all by the
meteoric adoption of Google by Internet users, the search engine often
even becoming the home page of their browser. A patent filed in 2001 by
Larry Page records this ranking mechanism under the term PageRank. The
miracle algorithm and its perpetual development in the retorts of the
Googleplex in Mountain View (California), which became its headquarters
in 2003, are part of the mythology attached to the firm. Legends that
can also be found in some current controversies about Google. Behind the
mysterious algorithm, somewhere between a golden ratio and a
philosophical formula, we believe we recognize questions of encryption,
even cryptography\... From its inception, however, Google has never
stopped developing strategies to inspire confidence. The company wants
to be moral, useful and reasonably greedy. The company\'s unofficial
slogan is a monument to New Age capitalism: \"Don\'t be evil.\" It is
embodied in a social model that still serves as a renowned showcase,
with Google employees remaining among the best-cared-for in the
Californian high-tech industry, regardless of the vicissitudes of the
crisis, and the same goes for those at the Paris headquarters, Place de
l\'Opéra. The creation of the Google.org foundation, its philanthropic
armed wing, is part of the same logic of the Empire of Good: under the
high authority of Dr. Larry Brilliant and Megan Smith, it aims to fight
climate change and global poverty. Richly endowed at its inception in
2004, it is also fueled by capital gains made on the stock market on
Google shares (introduced on Wall Street the same year), in accordance
with the in-house charter to which any purchaser of these shares
subscribes. We also find traces of this culture of capitalism \"with a
clear conscience\" in the personality of Eric Schmid, an old hand at
Silicon Valley, who Larry Page and Sergey Brin wisely put at the head of
the group in 2001. An unofficial advisor who was very involved with
Obama during the 2008 American campaign, he notably proposed to the
future president a plan to move the automobile industry and the entire
United States to renewable energy\... Ecology is another aspect of the
politics and its advertising practiced by Google. Like the solar panels
in Mountain View or the Data Center that the company has just built near
a river, in order to use the water for its cooling system (tens of
thousands of servers are connected to it). Because its model is based on
making all its services free for users (but selling to advertisers the
spaces that these services create), Google has thus been able to embody
a form of tolerable and almost experimental American capitalism.
Moreover, it was Microsoft\'s first serious rival: a free alternative
where a paying monopoly was exercised. But recently, Google has itself
become the contested Goliath, the sprawling and intrusive hydra that is
accused of wanting to know everything, put everything into parameters
and store everything. Even if it is always \"for free\". This is the
main fuel for the concern raised by Google: how far does the Mountain
View colossus intend to grow, what fields of application is it preparing
to invest in? Impossible to estimate as its growth allows it to invest
in different registers. It has already conquered online mapping and GPS
location, office automation, social networks (via YouTube, which it
bought), video sharing, it is launching a browser (Google Chrome),
supporting the development of an operating system (OS Chrome) that has
just taken off on mini-PCs and testing a bunch of software products in
its in-house laboratory, Google Labs. New territory: the mobile phone
market, for which analysts predict a dominant market share within three
years for the Android operating system that Google launched this year.
All smartphone manufacturers are invited to adopt it, again in open
source, i.e. for free. The same goes for all developers who want to
create applications under Android, just to make Apple understand who its
new rival is. In the decade that is opening, we will undoubtedly find
excellent opportunities to develop a certain anxiety, or paranoia, about
the titanic enterprise. However, the most serious quarrel is the one
that has opposed Google to publishers since the firm undertook to
digitize the entire world\'s printed collection and has been sued and
condemned for copyright infringement in court. We can consider these
condemnations legitimate and consider that Google remains indispensable
to our lives as Internet users. This bipolarity is the whole ambiguity
of our relationship with the beast Google. From this point of view,
Google is a perfect modern symbol of a very old chessboard: at the same
time the theater of a fight and the grid of a problem. We cannot really
untangle the indissoluble unity of opposites. Google is as much the
rational tool of our clear intelligences as the disturbing demon of our
nocturnal imaginations. In this dialectic that fuels our fascination,
the usual, everyday engine that no one would want to do without is also
the abyss of security phobias and the very symbol of the oppression that
may be coming. What are these prior conditionings preparing us for, the
most far-sighted wonder? What broader abandonment of responsibility are
we thus being trained for? Is Google\'s vocation to put every atom of
the world into parameters? Google will have nevertheless rendered us
quite a few services and familiarized us with concepts as not very
obvious as navigating the streets of the world\'s cities \"street
view\", that is to say on the roof of a car. It will have led us to the
more or less conscious practice of cloud computing, this storage of
data, sometimes personal, remotely, which sees us entrust all our
miserable little piles of secrets to distant and anonymous servers lost
in the ether of the Internet. The word Google entered the Oxford English
Dictionary in 2006. It is a verb. It means \"to search for information
on the Internet.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1153

The Socialist Party has been preparing its community site since this
fall. It is still under construction, but already has a name:
Lacoopol.fr THE NAME When announcing it at the end of August in La
Rochelle, Martine Aubry stumbled over the name of the new Internet
social network of the PS, a sort of Facebook open to activists and
sympathizers. Coopol evokes both the agricultural cooperative and the
digital kibbutz and does not hide its left-wing political nature behind
its little mouse. Difficult to pronounce, a little austere in its
presentation, Coopol is extremely clever in its design, entrusted to
Netscouade, the start-up of Benoît Thieulin, at the origin of the sites
Désirs d\'avenir of Ségolène Royal in the presidential election and of
Europe Ecologie in the European elections. If activists seize it, Coopol
could become an electoral war machine. \"On the Web, cooperation is a
rising value, as shown by the free software movement, or crowd sourcing:
calls to the masses of people, or to experts via Twitter,\" explains
Benoît Thieulin. Aubry wanted to get the PS back to work. Coopol is his
tool. The Coopol Concept is built on a dual observation. \"The PS has a
lot of difficulties at its head, but at the base a few tens of thousands
of activists are doing their job well. The 3,700 sections crisscross the
territory,\" notes Thieulin, also a member of the PS\'s ecological pole.
Except that the socialist has the blues because of the wars between
leaders and sometimes feels very alone. Coopol is a toolbox to restore
confidence and get the troops moving again. Another problem that affects
all parties: making these social sites exist. \"It is much easier to
reveal a community that already exists,\" explains Thieulin. Switching
to Coopol, the PS activist network, allows the virtual network to be
populated quickly and massively: an overwhelming majority of its
activists are Internet subscribers. The objective On the front of the
screen, each connected user sees the following written: \"My section, my
messaging, my friends, my groups, my diary\". In the middle, the local
and national \"events\" of the party that he chooses scroll by on his
\"control tower\" by clicking \"I participate, I do not participate,
maybe\". The section secretary can therefore, in three clicks and a few
SMS messages, deploy five activists at the exit of the metro, while
others take care of adapting the Solférino leaflet to the local
microclimate. And a third group goes door-to-door. And not just
anywhere: the election maps will be integrated into the system to target
leafleting, mailings for example on left-wing constituencies affected by
abstention. Based on the \"mybarackobama.com\" model, Coopol aims to
\"merge online and offline\": to articulate the virtual campaign and
field actions. The Coopol project also aims to be a catalyst for
internal debates. As on Facebook, each activist is invited to detail
their profile and make lots of \"friends\" among members and
sympathizers in their section and beyond. Thus Michel X, a PS
card-carrying schoolteacher in Calais, can create a group specializing
in education. He will be able to sponsor Zina, his \"friend\"
sympathizer, a retired teacher in Dunkirk, to participate in the group,
think about measures, go leafleting or go door-to-door during campaigns.
The goal is to transform each friend into a \"peer to peer\" recruiting
agent, according to Internet jargon, by gradually getting sympathizers
to join the party. \"Coopol is a membrane that blurs the line between
sympathizers and activists. We tell them: \"you don\'t pay before you
join.\" And on this platform we have tools for exchange and debate to
prepare a program,\" explains Benoît Thieulin. Meritocracy With its free
circulation of ideas, Coopol promotes meritocracy, to which the first
secretary is very attached. Groups producing original texts and actions
should see their work recognized. It is also a way to challenge the
baronies and inertia within the PS. \"There is a power issue within
Coopol,\" acknowledges Thieulin, who presented it to all the motions.
Rather than each presidential candidate setting up their own social
network, the issue is that each party\'s troops take a position within
Coopol. \"Those who are the most active, post the most videos, build
their legitimacy and notoriety,\" says Thieulin. But complete
transparency and decompartmentalization are a bit scary. During the
presentation of Coopol to the Parisian sections, voices were raised:
\"People were worried in the mode \'the management will be able to spy
on our exchanges\'\", said one participant. An Anti-Fraud Weapon With
its profiling of activists and sympathizers, Coopol is a dream sign-in
list for the future PS primaries. If the vote takes place with paper
ballots, \"the network can control the dissemination of results from the
field to the top\", notes Benoît Thieulin. An electronic anti-fraud
check. the Budget \"The PS does not want to communicate on this. The UMP
spoke of 1.8 million euros. Coopol will cost much less, but we do not
want to enter into a competition of who has the biggest. We can be
innovative without a lot of money\", continues Benoît Thieulin.
Conclusion: the Web is changing politics.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1154

These days, we celebrate the anniversaries of events that have shaken
the world: the 80th anniversary of the last financial crisis, the 70th
anniversary of the outbreak of World War II, or the 20th anniversary of
the fall of the Berlin Wall. It is also the anniversary of the
commissioning of the network of the American Department of Defense\'s
Research Projects Agency (ARPA). On October 29, 1969, in the computer
room of the computer science department at the University of California,
Los Angeles (UCLA), there are no journalists, photographers, or
businessmen. Just a group of students, doctoral students, their
professors, and an engineer from the BBN company who has been entrusted
with developing the software for the network\'s packet switches.
Professor Leonard Kleinrock is at the controls, surrounded by students
from the Network Working Group (NWG), he types on a simple terminal a
first character from the Sigma 7 computer to that of the Stanford
Research Institute (SRI) near San Francisco, then a second. On the
third, the software \"crashes\". That was forty years ago. I was the
only European in the group. A utopian project, led by academics, without
industrial participation, was taking shape. We were more or less aware
of participating in the emergence of a project rich in promise. However,
none of us would have dared to imagine the future of the Internet.
Through many twists and turns, from the ARPA network (the name Arpanet
only appeared in 1972) to \"Web 3.0\", the Internet has since
established itself as an essential tool in the world of today and
tomorrow, if we are to believe Joël de Rosnay\'s projections for Web
4.0. What genetic characteristics have allowed this little shoot to
become such a baobab? His luck was of course the implementation of
digital communication technologies, the miniaturization of circuits and
the triggering of the virtuous circle, a reproducible and increasingly
dense technology, offered to an increasingly wide audience, and
therefore less and less expensive. His luck was also the deregulation of
telecommunications and the globalization of the economy, of which it
was, moreover, a strategic tool. But why did the Arpanet and its
successor the Internet ultimately sweep away competing projects? The
ingredients for success were already in the embryo of the ARPA network
born from the meeting of diverse, even contradictory, visions,
objectives and personalities: military, academic or libertarian. The
military-inspired concern was invulnerability, hence the choice, for the
transmission network, of the packet switching technique: information can
pass through any path of a mesh network of packet switches; if one of
them is destroyed, communications are not disrupted. Academics provided
the first sites, developed specifications in complete independence from
manufacturers and major telecommunications operators, and invented the
first applications. ARPA contracts ensured them the necessary financial
independence. Sharing resources, in hardware, software, data and human
resources was a major objective. Added to this was a culture of
exchange. The network quickly also became a means of submitting
algorithms to the user community to verify, programs to test and data to
archive. It would become a lever for promoters of free software. It was
able to galvanize disinterested energies and intelligence, both
individual and collective. Finally, the young researchers at UCLA were
not insensitive to the libertarian spirit that reigned there. The winter
of 1969-1970 was also one of protest in American universities: a sort of
May 68 against the backdrop of the Vietnam War, which was increasingly
poorly supported by students, and the revolt of ethnic minorities. The
philosophy that they instilled in the network through its specifications
was based on independence, freedom, transparency, sharing and
pragmatism. From the outset, in May 1968, they institutionalized a
system of open and public specifications, based on competence, mutual
recognition and consensus, which later proved to be one of the major
success factors of the project. The \"request for comments\" (RFCs) have
defied time: 5,689 RFCs have been published in forty years, and always
with the same sobriety of presentation. All the RFCs available today on
the Internet constitute an extraordinary \"memory\" of the collective
process of construction and evolution of the network. Freedom of
expression will become a hobby horse of the pioneers of the Internet: on
the network, everything must be able to be said, it is \"forbidden to
forbid\"; it is up to everyone to show critical thinking, to filter and
cross-check information. The initial exclusive use of the English
language shows how monocultural these genes were\... Twenty years later,
a European research team introduced the World Wide Web, a web on which
one can navigate by following links that connect information, wherever
it is found. This application will complement the assets of the
Internet, and will allow it to make its entrance at the beginning of the
1990s on the global political, economic, social and societal scene, and
to eliminate competing industrial networks. Their pragmatism is finally
well characterized by the famous statement: \"We reject kings,
presidents and votes. We believe in consensus and programs that work.\"
We owe the success of the Internet to the good initial choices and the
dynamics that resulted from them: the collaboration of tens of thousands
of students, or volunteers, such as for example these hundreds of people
who continually enrich online encyclopedias such as Wikipedia. In
France, some had detected the promising young shoot, had seen in Arpanet
a weak signal, bearer of the future. Unfortunately those who perceive
are not those who decide, and those who proposed an approach modeled on
the Internet were not followed: by sticking to technical economic
arguments, or national independence, with Transpac then Teletel, and
while scoring points in the short term, we chose to withdraw into our
own backyard, and ignored the human springs that allowed the Internet to
finally prevail. Over the years, the Internet has been a continuous
creation that has been able to minimize the constraints of use. It
offers powerful tools that are accessible to all, which has greatly
benefited organizations that do not have significant financial means to
communicate: the associative sector has thus been a major beneficiary,
when it has been able to appropriate it. Today, the Internet has become
a strategic tool for global solidarity, perhaps the source of a more
participatory citizenship, even if we should not be naive: good and
evil, narcissism and conviviality, order and disorder can be expressed
there. Nevertheless, why not dedicate this fortieth anniversary to these
very many passionate but obscure contributors, who, over the years, have
devoted their free time, day and night, to weaving this Web, bringing it
an element of structure, or content, filling it with their know-how and
knowledge, animating it and imposing it as the tool of universal
knowledge and communication. In recognition of this pioneering role, the
user must be able to retain a right of inspection over the Net and its
developments, of which he is a co-owner. At a time when the Internet is
becoming an essential pillar of the organization of our society, when
the development of a democratic culture on the Net could be threatened,
and when their accessibility could be the pretext for profit-making
companies to appropriate components of what until now was considered
common goods, the Web must be recognized as a public good, and the
freedom to access it as a fundamental right.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1155

The transfer of clean technologies from rich countries to those of the
South is a key and taboo subject. Launched in Rio in 1992, it has been
put into practice since Kyoto in 1997. Since then, there has been a
fight over intellectual property rights. What is at stake? The matter is
\"crucial\", according to a Brazilian negotiator. \"Secondary\", for a
French diplomat. Maria Mutagamba, Minister of the Environment of Uganda:
\"These transfers are vital. We have sun, water, wind. But very few
means to channel renewables. So, we cut down wood.\" She is irritated by
the pressure from rich countries on the preservation of forests. \"We
have to survive. We need everything.\" The countries of the South make
the climate a global public good. And ask for exceptions such as for
access to medicines. \"The comparison does not hold up,\" says Anne
Chetaille, of Coordination Sud. There is no monopoly situation and many
green technologies - apart from carbon capture and storage - are already
in the public domain.\" But, \"unlike medicines, notes a French expert,
where duplication is possible on a fax and a physical formula, climate
technology is expensive, even without a patent.\" Maria Mutagamba
assures us: \"We need solar, high-capacity wind turbines, biomass, 2nd
generation biofuels. And we want there to finally be an international
legal framework for this.\" Eight billion dollars per year feed the
1,500 clean development mechanisms (fewer than 30 projects go to
Africa). \"In the meantime,\" says Cheikh Ndiaye Sylla, a delegate, \"we
make do with the means at hand. We have just launched the construction
of a coal-fired power station with Sweden. Problem: it does not meet
European standards.\" Africa is not the issue, say the rich countries.
The big emerging countries are. \"China is already in the world\'s top 5
patenters of green technologies,\" laments a Canadian delegate. It is
not necessarily the most technologically advanced. \"The fact that China
or India do not have 5-megawatt gigawind turbines like Vestas in Denmark
is not a tragedy,\" sighs Brice Lalonde, French climate ambassador. If
necessary, adds a European, \"they will pirate them. We are not going to
give away our companies\' secrets!\" The reality is more nuanced. \"We
could export coal-fired power stations with a 35% efficiency,\" notes a
Frenchman. \"The Chinese make 25% maximum.\" In any case, the companies
are keeping a close eye on things. \"More than 2,500 business delegates
are on edge and are putting pressure on them so that the patents do not
come out of the negotiations in tatters,\" says Yiorgos Vassalos, from
the Corporate European Observatory network. How do we get out of this?
\"Not by suspending patent protection, as the Philippines, Indonesia and
Bolivia dream of,\" rebuffs a German delegate. The G77 (133 developing
countries) is campaigning for a multilateral fund for climate
technologies, which could come out of Copenhagen. \"The idea is to set
up a patent pool with a source of funding to compensate for the loss of
income for high-tech companies,\" notes an NGO expert. Offering clean
technologies without paying royalties. With the risk of a new gas plant:
who will fuel it? How? By how much? \"We need at least 40 billion euros
per year to develop and especially disseminate green technologies in the
South,\" reminds Karine Gavand of Greenpeace. Money is lacking, and the
aid plan of 10 billion per year until 2013 is not likely to reverse the
situation. Developing countries are talking about doubling their public
and private investments by 2012. Rich countries are talking about
quadrupling them by 2020. This does not solve the problem of
intellectual property rights, which will explode with the rise of green
tech. As a result, other ideas are emerging. \"We also want to create 5
regional centers for technological innovation,\" says an Indian. \"We
can also develop compulsory licenses, like what is done for medicines,\"
believes Pedro Roffe, from the International Center for Trade and
Sustainable Development. In France, the Center for Strategic Analysis
(CAS) argued at the end of November for the copyleft model that applies
in the world of free software (open source). \"Example: the Eco-Patent
Commons initiative launched in 2008 by the World Economic Council for
Sustainable Development,\" notes the CAS. Since then, companies have
joined the project and hundreds of ecotechnologies on \"energy
efficiency, wastewater treatment and recycling\" have emerged. The
future? Nnimmo Bassey, president of Friends of the Earth International,
sees it this way: \"If we want to get out of this, we have to put
competition on hold. And talk about partnership, cooperation,
solidarity. Otherwise, we will patent barbed wire to contain climate
refugees.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1156

James Cameron has always had something of a Marxist about him: for him,
everything is political. So when he tells us that Avatar \"is a
political commentary on the history of humanity\", he is not making a
special glance at the red Libération, he is stating the obvious that
could apply to all his films. Avatar is political in a more frontal way
than one could imagine, a very 21st century way, that is to say
ecological. As chance would have it, we met James Cameron on the opening
day of the Copenhagen summit, and he himself had not missed the
objective coincidence: \"Yes, it is a film about this feeling of the
loss of nature that we all share today\", he slips in between two
remarks on the \"culpable delay taken by the United States under the
Bush administration\" and \"the universal conscience that is finally
expressed today\". The planet Pandora where Cameron takes us to plant
his Avatar is a small, marvelous and literally heavenly Earth, where
animal, plant and humanoid species live in a silky interlacing of
symbiotic fluids. Pandora, to its great misfortune, is colonized by an
earthly army that is especially after its magnificent mineral resources.
The confrontation that will take place there, telluric, is that of
industry against nature, of waste against sustainability, of respect
against exploitation, of technological civilization against a harmonious
and immaculate wild state. Since, perhaps, Kubrick\'s Eyes Wide Shut, no
film has been as eagerly awaited as Avatar. It\'s probably Titanic\'s
fault, since it earned Cameron the halo of the greatest success in the
history of cinema: \$1.8 billion in worldwide box office receipts. Not
necessarily easy to wear, nor the best angle from which to be expected
at the turn: how can you do better than that? Independence and financial
autonomy Cameron himself is also to blame, who has never stopped
presenting his new project from the angle of all the challenges:
developing the exclusive camera capable of giving shape to his dream,
bringing global exploitation into line to force the hand of 3D theater
equipment, bringing an entire industry into digital harmony by
announcing, well in advance, that his film would revolutionize the
history of cinema techniques. As a result, we probably attribute more to
James Cameron than he can assume: the \"visionary of entertainment\"
remains a fallible artist, like all the others. But he is still capable
of inventing both the economic system and the technological framework in
which his cinema is possible. And he is probably the only one in this
case. The only one to have allowed himself so much independence in his
choices, autonomy in his finances and finally freedom, even if it is a
freedom under pressure, proportional to the risks and investments. As
for Avatar, the question remains whether Fox and Cameron can make money
with a film based on an original and unknown story (whereas blockbusters
derived from licenses like Harry Potter, Spider-Man or Twilight have a
prior notoriety in their favor), a film that also does not have real
Hollywood superstars - despite all our respect for Sigourney Weaver -
and which will not be able to count, as in the past, on making a
comeback thanks to a DVD market that is drying up. The film will need an
exceptional attendance in theaters to be able to cover the costs,
estimated at 500 million dollars, including around 200 million for
marketing (or respectively 339 and 136 million euros, according to
cross-checked and plausible figures, but not confirmed by the main
parties concerned). Budgets or revenues of such a height, today, are not
found in the rest of the film industry but in the video game industry,
of which Cameron is also an excellent connoisseur. All categories of
entertainment combined, it is indeed a game released a month ago, Call
of Duty Modern Warfare 2, which holds the record for immediate profits
with 550 million dollars collected in the first five days of its launch.
Cameron is better aware than any other filmmaker that it is with such
products that he now finds himself in competition. The refusal to
compromise One of James Cameron\'s singularities, and probably the main
reason for his dizzying rise, is due to an obsessive taste for
perfection. On a set, behind the scenes, he controls everything, checks
everything, masters everything. This character trait is common to most
filmmakers, but this omnipotence assumed without complex by Cameron is
as much in the financing aspect as in the choice of actors, the
construction of ultra-sophisticated shooting equipment or, obviously, in
the excellence of the special effects of which he supervises the
smallest step. In this, Cameron has a family resemblance to Stanley
Kubrick, whose film 2001: A Space Odyssey was both an adolescent shock
and a revelation for the author of Titanic. Kubrick could wait years, or
even abandon a project, if the conditions necessary for its realization
were not met. The recent release of a book by Taschen reminded us that
Kubrick finally abandoned the idea of making his Napoleon, a project
that literally tormented him, in the absence of sufficient funding. This
is even the reason why he founded his own company: to never again have
to deal with studios, subject to chronic fickleness. Similarly, Kubrick
preferred to indefinitely postpone his Artificial Intelligence, AI,
project, because he was waiting for progress in robotics to be
sufficiently advanced to entrust the main role to an authentic robot.
Spielberg, less patient, did not have the same requirements. He went to
get Haley Joel Osment, the leading man of The Sixth Sense, to direct AI.
While the refusal to compromise seems to be the common characteristic of
the two filmmakers, the fundamental difference between Kubrick and
Cameron is that the latter generally gets his way. No other contemporary
director, without a doubt, could have completed an enterprise like
Titanic and, even more so, like Avatar. To complete Titanic, Cameron
gave up his salary (\$8 million) and put his royalties on the line. It
was not the first time and, in Hollywood, everyone knows that money is
not the right lever to make Cameron give in. When he directed the first
Terminator, in 1984, he had put his last dollars into additional scenes,
had given all the rights to the producer Gale Anne Hurd for a symbolic
dollar and slept in his car. The story ended well since just after
filming, he married the producer. For Avatar, the context is a little
different. How can you refuse something to someone whose previous film
broke all records? Nineteen weeks in a row at the top of the American
box office, a DVD release while the film is still being released
exclusively in theaters. Paramount, which was the exclusive distributor
of Titanic (and which, for that, had contributed \$65 million to the
film\'s budget), even received countless requests from exhibitors for
new copies because theirs were so worn out. In short, how can you say
\"no\" to the director of Titanic? Sophistication and perfection Jon
Landau, producer of Titanic and Avatar, carefully sidesteps the
question, which is also a way of answering it. \"We have to talk. I\'ve
known Jim for a long time and we\'ve had countless arguments about
budget and the feasibility of certain scenes. Like everyone else, he
accepts compromises but only if he is absolutely convinced that it
doesn\'t harm the story he wants to tell. Never otherwise. For example,
when we made Titanic, the hydraulic system that tilted the ship was
extremely expensive. The script called for three angles of tilt for
specific shots. One flat, obviously, one of three degrees, and one of
six degrees. Each of the installations cost a million dollars, and that
was a big problem. Jim decided that we were going to do without the
three-degree tilt. It was a compromise, a million-dollar compromise,
that didn\'t jeopardize the coherence of the film or his own vision.\"
In the case of Avatar, James Cameron\'s vision was intimately linked to
the sophistication of computer-generated images. For nearly four years,
alongside Hollywood technology master Vince Pace, Cameron developed the
camera and digital technologies necessary for the film, at a development
cost estimated at \$14 million (9 million euros). He paid particular
attention to motion capture shots, perfecting the system to achieve
perfect realism of the Na\'vis, these slender humanoid creatures, three
meters tall, with blue and slightly striped skin. He did indeed succeed.
Just as he had demanded, and obtained, the development of an underwater
camera allowing shots in great depths. This machine, now used by
underwater expeditions, was designed by James Cameron\'s brother, Mike,
with the help of the manufacturer Panasonic. Just as he had pushed the
engineers of his own company Digital Domain to their limits for this
astonishing scene in Abyss, when a water tentacle penetrates the
underwater station, taking on the physical appearance of those it meets.
At that time, in 1989, no one had done that. Cameron himself was so
unsure of the outcome that he wrote the script so that the scene could
be cut without affecting the dramatic flow. \"Don\'t get me wrong, if
what I need already exists, I\'d rather buy it than make it,\" Cameron
says. \"I don\'t do this for fun. But if it\'s necessary, then I\'ll do
it. Besides, if I hadn\'t been a filmmaker, I probably would have chosen
a career in science, as an engineer or in basic research.\" And he adds,
giving back to the geek generations who made him king: \"These tools
that we have created are open source: they are available to everyone,
for other films. I want everyone to take them and improve them, so that
I too can benefit from more advanced technology when I make my next
film.\" The filmmaker\'s intransigence remains legendary, however. A
reputation as a dictator that has earned him some rather harsh
score-settling with actors who were mistreated on set and especially
with the technicians whom he never spares. Thus, when Kate Winslet swore
by all the gods that she would never work with Cameron again because she
had nearly drowned on the set of Titanic, the director remained very
phlegmatic: \"We let her believe that she was drowning, it\'s not the
same thing. You can\'t take into account a few splashes\... But the real
question is: \"Will Kate do a film with me?\" And the answer is yes,
certainly. She\'s a very talented actress.\" This reputation is not a
legend. Starting his career with the king of tinkering, Roger Corman, in
the 70s, Cameron commented on his first steps in the dream industry:
\"After three weeks, I had my own department \[special effects,
editor\'s note\] and everyone who worked with me hated me.\" Two years
later, Cameron made his first feature film, Piranhas 2, which he
described as: \"The best flying piranha film ever made\...\" Not only
was the film a script disaster, but it was also a battleground between
Cameron, hired just so that the credits would include an American name,
and producer Ovidio G. Assonitis, a famous pheasant and notorious maker
of trash. The shoot was a path of suffering and, towards the end,
Cameron was thrown out like a dirty dog. The producer confiscated the
reels, but Cameron obviously didn\'t see it that way. He went to Rome
and sneaked into the studios at night to re-edit his film. The result
was so catastrophic in any case that Cameron would never again speak of
it except in a bitter joke. Stubborn as a mule In this conflictual
register, the peak was reached on the set of Abyss. Actress Elisabeth
Mastrantonio lived through, she would say, an ordeal. Fatigue, nervous
tension, and Cameron\'s detestable relationship with the technical team
invaded the entire set. Ed Harris later recounted that he was prey to
inexplicable crying fits when he found himself alone. Mary Elisabeth
Mastrantonio was on the verge of a nervous breakdown, frankly pointing
to Cameron as the person responsible for this state. An incident lit the
fuse. While the actress, traumatized by the idea of faking her own
death, made a superhuman effort to shoot the scene, she left the set,
swearing that she would never set foot there again. She would only learn
a few hours later that the scene had to be reshot because there was not
enough film in the store. As for the technicians, they had a range of
T-shirts made with slogans as charming as \"Son of Abyss\" or, better
still, \"I can take anything, I worked with James Cameron.\" Ambiance.
On the subject, Jon Landau has a little idea. \"The truth is that Jim
doesn\'t expect more from those who work with him than he expects from
himself. Is he demanding? Yes, no doubt, but never without reason.\" He
knows something about it. If there is a socio-professional category with
which Cameron has regularly argued, it is that of the producers. As soon
as Terminator was filmed, he got very angry with John Daly who wanted
the film to end with the epic (and expensive) scene of the tanker truck
explosion. \"Fuck you. The film is not finished,\" James Cameron loudly
replied in front of a group of petrified technicians. Not only did he
shoot the ending he wanted, when the android dies crushed in a hydraulic
press, but he still found a way to shoot additional scenes, on his own
money, without the agreement of the production and even less that of the
local authorities. For a day, he plays hide-and-seek with the police in
the streets of Los Angeles with a camera and Arnold Schwarzenegger
dressed in leather from head to toe. Cameron stubborn as a mule?
Certainly, but not as caricatured as that, according to Jon Landau: \"He
always accepts all the good ideas, wherever they come from, from an
actor, a technician and even a producer, that\'s saying something. This
is probably one of the reasons why so many people, in the technical, the
sets, the costumes have worked with him for so many years. The only
thing you should never do with Jim is tell him that you don\'t agree
without a very very good reason.\" It seems that no one had a valid
reason to prevent him from taking four years of work on his Avatar.
Landau confirms. \"He managed, and I helped him a little, to convince
people that this film needed that. In Hollywood, the norm is to run
before you walk. We had the opportunity to learn to walk before we
started running.\" In Avatar, it is the paraplegic hero Jake Sully who,
at the beginning of the film, relearns to run once his human soul has
been transplanted into a body of the indigenous Na\'vi species. Despite
its commotion and feverishness, this scene is one of the most moving in
the film because it concentrates all of its complex, grandiose and
ambiguous dream. It\'s a bit like James Cameron needed to design worlds
and creatures that were definitively foreign and to experience their
otherness as much as possible (a Terminator, blue aliens), to better
reflect ourselves in their mirror. A complex dream In Avatar, the
Na\'vis are other selves, a projection, a metamorphosis, the simulacrum
of a humanity that would have branched off differently, a hypothesis.
James Cameron is like that himself. At once a Renaissance man who
invents his tools and whose craftsmanship advances an entire industry
and a worried filmmaker. At once a visionary and a petty tyrant for whom
the end justifies the means. At once an affable guy and the sincere
citizen of an ecological world that he calls for. Both aware of our
impasses, which he brilliantly metaphorizes in Avatar, and hungry for
expensive technologies. Both the last of the Hollywood classics and the
first of the moderns of the digital age. Moreover, to resume the
conversation with him where we had started it, Cameron reaffirms: \"Yes,
Avatar is a political commentary on ourselves. But it is above all
entertainment!\" We are all reassured.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1157

\"I am delighted, on the occasion of my LeWeb conference, which will
take place in Paris on December 9 and 10, to give you a brief summary of
the different trends that are currently occurring in Silicon Valley, in
San Francisco, where I moved two years ago. The first, and also the
theme this year, will be the Web in real time.\" It was in a video and
in his slightly arrogant style that, at the beginning of October, Loïc
Le Meur presented the problem at the heart of his new conference (1).
Today and tomorrow, in the premises of CentQuatre in Paris, 2,000 people
from all over the world - entrepreneurs, business angels, venture
capitalists, Internet companies and bloggers - will come to exchange,
form partnerships and do business around the Web in real time.
Symbolized by Twitter, this notion, in full mutation, designates both a
new tool and a new form of immediate communication. The interest for the
brands and services present at LeWeb 09 (including, of course, Seesmic,
Le Meur\'s company) is that this \"ecosystem\" allows the creation of
open and real-time communities. In addition to the debates
\"Twitter-Facebook, who will win the battle?\" and \"How will the giants
Google, Microsoft and MySpace react?\", we will also talk about
mobility, the culture of free and micropayments. But let\'s talk about
the star guests of this sixth edition. During five-minute speeches or
during debates, the founders or directors Jack Dorsey (Twitter), Chad
Hurley (YouTube), Marissa Meyer (Google), Jean-Philippe Courtois
(Microsoft), Mike Jones (MySpace) will take turns, as well as star
columnists Michael Arrington (TechCrunch) and Robert Scoble
(Scobleizer), Her Majesty Rania of Jordan (why? Because she is very
connected on the Internet, with more than a million subscribers to her
Twitter account, specifies the organizer) and the American author and
blogger Violet Blue, of OpenSource Sex, a famous podcast dedicated to
sexuality. In addition, workshops are also planned (organized by Google,
Facebook, PayPal and\... Danone), a \"DemoZone\" to exhibit its new
products or even a \"start-up stage\" which will see the applications
developed by 1,200 start-ups compete in the hope of winning a nice
crystal trophy. And above all, to be noticed by a potential financier.
For latecomers, there are still a few tickets at 1,995 euros (yes, but
for both days). And for those who are broke, all the conferences will be
broadcast live on the Web. \"One of the special features,\" explained
the organizer on France Info on Monday, \"is that we don\'t do any
advertising. It\'s really word of mouth. It\'s organized a bit like a
rave party.\" Holy Loïc. (1) To follow on leweb.net

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1158

According to economic theory, the price of innovative products,
initially high because their manufacturer wants to recover their
development costs as quickly as possible, falls as they are distributed.
Robert Solow (Nobel Prize in Economics in 1987) demonstrated that the
capacity of computers increased each year while remaining at a constant
price, which allowed the productivity gains they bring to be rapidly
distributed throughout the economy. But in reality, where the weight of
social and political power relations weighs as much as the \"laws of the
market\", this virtuous cycle does not necessarily hold true. First of
all, innovative firms do everything they can to maintain their margins
by conquering monopoly positions (Microsoft, Google), or by multiplying
the functionalities - more or less useful - which allow them to justify
maintaining high prices. For their part, the firms dominating the
sectors threatened by the emergence of new entrants work to slow down
their progress. The diffusion of innovations and their beneficial
effects are delayed by this amount, because their prices remain high. As
the economist Daniel Cohen shows in the report \"Towards the emergence
of new growth models\" (October 2009), France\'s entry into the
\"knowledge economy\" has been slowed down above all by the
insufficiency of household income to acquire innovative products that
have remained too expensive. The process will also be slow to move to a
\"sustainable\" mode of production. The Environment and Energy
Management Agency (ADEME) has calculated that the average French
consumer\'s basket includes 5 euros of eco-labeled products, 32 euros of
organic products and 4 euros of fair trade products\... per year! It is
to correct these market distortions that the public authorities
intervene, in two ways. On the one hand, it strives to lower the price
of innovations by financially supporting research and by limiting
monopolistic situations by providing aid to \"innovative SMEs\"; On the
other hand, it tries to increase the price of obsolete technologies to
influence the cost-benefit trade-off of economic agents. In the case of
the transition to \"green technologies\", it is a question of reflecting
in the price of products and services the cost of their impact on the
environment (their \"carbon content\"). This is what is called the
\"price signal\". There are two ways of issuing it. The first consists
of creating a market where economic actors buy certificates or rights
reflecting the \"carbon content\" of their activities. The most virtuous
earn money by selling their rights to the least virtuous. In 2005, the
European Union created such a market between the most polluting
companies. But the limits appeared quite quickly. The price of carbon
has undergone variations due more to investor speculation or pressure
from industrial lobbies than to the real performance of companies. Above
all, these remain very difficult to evaluate, which creates an asymmetry
of information that is harmful to the market. This financialization
leads a growing number of economists to prefer the other transmitter of
the \"price signal\", taxation, which makes it possible to determine a
fixed and predictable price and to more easily guide the choices of
economic actors. But it increases the price of the most used goods and
services, which is politically and socially delicate; unless there are
alternatives that are both \"decarbonized\" and\... cheap. Alternative
models are therefore increasingly often put forward. That of free
software offers a way of disseminating innovation that is free from
market constraints; that of \"compulsory licenses\" allows States to
have drugs manufactured without paying royalties to pharmaceutical
laboratories in the event of a health crisis; that of public service
innovation makes it possible to make available to the greatest number a
tool deemed to be of collective interest by the State, like the Internet
health service designed by the British National Health Service\...

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1159

OTTAWA - (QMI Agency) The Canadian government could save up to \$18
million a year by using Open Office software instead of dealing with its
usual suppliers who require licensing fees for their software, according
to a Public Works and Government Services Canada document obtained by
researcher Ken Rubin under the Access to Information Act. Ottawa spent
about \$90 million over a five-year period to obtain the rights to use
software from Microsoft, Corel and IBM. However, the federal government
could save money by using open source software, it is argued. Open
Office, for example, offers word processing, electronic calculation and
graphics software, and is considered secure. Open source software This
document is part of a federal government initiative to use open source
software. The Treasury Board website mentions this, noting that Canada
appears to have some catching up to do in this area. Open source
software is software that can be obtained for free by downloading it.
The user normally has the right to copy, distribute, or modify the
software as they wish.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1160

(MAG) The LinuQ group held a day yesterday to promote the Linux
operating system and the world of free software. Interested people were
able to install, completely free of charge, the system that replaces the
classic Windows or Mac OS, sometimes even coexisting with these two
giants, while offering impressive stability and reliability. Other
activities of the same type take place during the year and are listed at
www.agendadulibre.qc.ca.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1161

For the past four years, Poitiers has hosted a cutting-edge
international festival at the crossroads of art and programming, for all
lovers of lines of code. Make Art strives to popularize practices in
digital arts and the philosophy of free software. This new edition,
entitled What the Fork?, uses a computer metaphor (fork means fork) to
promote a decentralized way of working. \"Copy, patch, improve,
experiment, change direction, inspire! Forking is not just about hacks,
but about creating a space for experimentation,\" explain the
organizers. On the program: exhibitions, concerts, creative programming,
presentations (not to be missed are British artists Simon Yuill, Wayne
Clement, Foocorp, etc.), and above all the opportunity to get your hands
dirty during workshops. Make Art from December 8 to 13 in Poitiers.
http://makeart.goto10.org

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1162

Brussels blocks Oracle COMPETITION According to Bloomberg, Brussels
could block Oracle\'s \$7.4 billion acquisition of Sun. The
Commission\'s concerns relate to MySQL, a Swedish subsidiary of Sun that
the Commission says could be eliminated by Oracle because it competes
with its products. Oracle would then have \"total control\" over the
source code and intellectual property, the Commission worries. If Oracle
and Sun are merged, it would make it the world\'s second-largest
enterprise software publisher, behind IBM. Oracle CEO Larry Ellison said
the delay requested by the Commission to conduct its investigation is
costing Sun \$100 million per month. He said the Commission\'s
objections reveal a \"profound misunderstanding\" of competition in
databases and the dynamics of open source. On Friday, Oracle asked the
European Commission for an additional week to complete its file.
According to the Commission, this delay would bring the end of the
investigation to January 27.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1163

\"I draw Xkcd, an online comic strip about stick figures who do math,
play with staplers, have fun on the Internet, and have a lot of sex.
About three-quarters of it is autobiographical.\" So confided Randall
Munroe, the author of Xkcd, one of the most famous comic strips on the
Internet and a reference for the so-called geek population, to the New
Yorker. Every Monday, Wednesday, and Friday at midnight, he publishes a
drawing. A reflection or an anecdote about life. About love as well as
the game Guitar Hero. About death as well as the free software guru
Richard Stallman. One day in September 2005, when he was 22 and a
robotics consultant for NASA, Munroe came across the drawings and
scribbles he had covered his math class notes with. He decided to scan
them and put them online. Given the success of the site, he decided to
\"get more serious about drawing.\" In a few months, the cult was born.
Today, Xkcd.com receives up to 500,000 visitors per day, and supports
three people. Xkcd is not an acronym. Munroe is amused by this choice,
which represents nothing more than four characters. Xkcd is a few boxes,
characters sketched very simply, most often in black and white. It is a
tone, sometimes sarcastic, sometimes tender, often absurd and funny. And
it is a range of themes: Facebook, velociraptor attacks, sex, Wikipedia,
fractals, sudoku or Ninja turtles. Most of the references are
understandable to everyone. Such as the \"Scrabble\" board. In the
image: a game of the famous game in subjective view. On the board, two
letters placed: \"MI.\" In the narrator\'s hands: \"CLTORIS.\" In the
comments: \"It always happens to me when I play Scrabble with my
family.\" Published under the Creative Commons 2.5 license (which
authorizes the duplication and remix of a work for non-commercial
purposes), Munroe\'s boards are translated voluntarily by fans around
the world. There are (unofficial) versions in Spanish, Russian, and
German. And in French too: Philippe Gambette had the idea of developing
a collaborative interface. Anyone can propose a translation, moderators
validate it and 98% of the boards are available. Xkcd has just had its
ultimate consecration. On the American site Wired, blogger Matt Blum
published \"The 10 Geek Laws That Should Exist But Don\'t.\" And
Munroe\'s law ranks number 1: \"In a geek debate, the one who can cite
Xkcd to support his position automatically wins.\" http://xkcd.com In
French: http://xkcd.free.fr

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1164

Whether you\'re new to the Mac world or not, everyone wants good
software that lets you do everything you want for free, right? The
OpenSource Mac site offers a list of software for chatting, transferring
files, playing videos, editing photos, and more. The software is
\"free\", meaning it\'s developed by a community that works hard to make
everything work as well (if not better!) than commercial software. The
site is in English, but most of the software on the site can be
installed in French. opensourcemac.org

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1165

Whether you\'re new to the Mac world or not, everyone wants good
software that lets you do everything you want for free, right? The
OpenSource Mac site offers a list of software for chatting, transferring
files, playing videos, editing photos and much more. The software is
\"free\", meaning it\'s developed by a community that works hard to make
everything work as well (if not better!) than commercial software. The
site is in English, but most of the software on the site can be
installed in French.opensourcemac.org

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1166

All over the world, Internet users celebrated the fifth anniversary of
the Firefox browser this week. A look back at a software that changed
the web. Five years ago, everything suggested that Microsoft had won the
web browser war. About 95% of those who accessed the Internet did so by
clicking on the Internet Explorer icon. Microsoft\'s software had
soundly beaten its competitor Netscape, which had dominated the market
until the end of the 90s. In the shadows, however, a project was taking
shape that would reignite the war. The Mozilla Foundation was working on
the design of a new browser. First called Phoenix, then Firebird, the
first version of the browser was released on November 9, 2004 under the
name Mozilla Firefox. Its main feature: the project is \"free\".
Thousands of programmers from all over the world collaborated on its
development. All have access to the code and can modify it. As early as
2005, the specialist magazine Wired was raving about it. \"The Firefox
browser is an impressive piece of software. It\'s easy to use, easy to
look at and more secure than Internet Explorer.\" Firefox had just dug
up the hatchet. Since Firefox\'s arrival, Internet Explorer\'s market
share has gradually eroded. According to the most recent data compiled
by the firm Net Applications, nearly a quarter of Internet users now use
Firefox to go on the web. Five years after adopting the browser, the
president of Île sans fil is still enthusiastic. \"We were stuck with
Internet Explorer for years. Firefox relaunched the market and Internet
Explorer was forced to adapt. That\'s why we have a richer web today,\"
says Laurent Maisonnave, also an Internet marketing consultant. Firefox
claims 330 million active users. The software has been downloaded more
than a billion times. Free software advocates are pleased that this
project has rallied so many Internet users. \"Firefox is exemplary in
terms of organization because it is a non-profit foundation. It is an
extraordinary technological platform because it runs on Windows, Linux
and Mac. It was a huge gamble, which has paid off. Now, we can say that
it is the leader,\" says Cyrille Béraud, president of the Association
for the Collective Appropriation of Free Computing (FACIL). Laurent
Maisonnave believes that Firefox has brought credibility to all free
software. \"Before, we used to say that free software was something that
geeks developed in their corner, that didn\'t work in companies or at
home. Mozilla has demonstrated, with marketing worthy of a large
company, that free software is just as good, if not better, than
proprietary software.\" The Mozilla Foundation, which oversees the
development of Firefox, plans to release version 4.0 of the browser in a
year. In addition to Microsoft\'s Internet Explorer and Apple\'s Safari
browsers, Firefox now has to face competition from Google, which
launched its own browser, Chrome, in September 2008. Competition that
Laurent Maisonnave sees favorably. \"Today we have much more choice.
There is diversity, there is competition, there is more supply. Everyone
is happy. The web is much richer and it is very much appreciated by
users.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1167

Five years after its launch on November 9, 2004, the Firefox browser is
used by one in four Internet users worldwide. At the expense of the
American computer giant Microsoft and its Internet Explorer, which has
lost its monopoly on this niche of software for connecting to the
Internet and displaying Web pages on a computer. How did Mozilla, the
publisher of Firefox, a non-profit foundation created by a handful of
unemployed computer scientists, achieve such a feat? First, thanks to
the qualities of Firefox. From the first version, the reception was
enthusiastic: the software was considered much faster and more secure
than Internet Explorer. It offers new functions, including \"tabbed
browsing\" allowing you to keep all the websites open in the form of
tabs in a single window. And a multitude of additional functions (7,000
to date) that can be added to the browser (Google search bar, messaging,
etc.), to customize it endlessly. The fact that Firefox is free
software - anyone can access its lines of code - explains these
qualities. The founders of Mozilla, pioneers of navigation, in fact
chose to call on the global community of developers so that, on a
voluntary basis, they could contribute to the \"core\" of the browser
that they wanted to improve. This core came from the company Netscape,
for which they had worked but which was knocked out by Microsoft in the
late 1990s, when the computer giant decided to distribute Internet
Explorer for free, while Netscape was paid. As a result, thousands of
computer scientists, passionate about free software and often
anti-Microsoft, began working on the project in addition to their usual
activities. \"Firefox is divided into modules. Each module has its
\"expert\" chosen by his peers, responsible for coordinating its
improvements. There are about a hundred of them and they work with up to
1,000 contributors, who write lines of code. Between 10,000 and 20,000
others are testing these lines almost live,\" explains Tristan Nitot,
President of Mozilla Europe. The lack of involvement of Microsoft\'s
teams in Internet Explorer has also left the field open to Firefox:
\"After killing Netscape, at one point, they even redeployed their teams
to write the Vista operating system,\" assures Mr. Nitot. The
competition is waking up But the situation is changing. Of course,
Firefox\'s audience could still grow: Windows 7, Microsoft\'s new
operating system, offers not only Internet Explorer but also its
competitors by default. It will therefore no longer be necessary to go
to the Firefox website to download the browser. However, the competition
has woken up. Microsoft has started working on its tool again. And the
online search giant Google, although a partner of Firefox (it pays the
browser for the traffic that the latter sends it), launched a competing
browser in 2008, Chrome, which already captures between 2% and 3% of the
audience. \"The browser is increasingly strategic: it is the first
gateway to the Internet and it now allows applications (spreadsheets,
messaging, word processing) to be run without going through the
operating system of the machines. That is why Google is getting
involved,\" according to Laurent Geffroy, of Greenwich Consulting.
\"What the Google teams want above all is to counter Microsoft. They
believe that Internet Explorer, because of its technical limitations, is
holding them back: Internet users who arrive at their engine via
Microsoft\'s tool cannot benefit from all their innovations,\" believes
Mr. Nitot.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1168

French researcher Francis Muguet was found dead on Wednesday, October
14, in his Paris apartment, probably the victim of a heart attack. Born
on April 30, 1955 in Paris, he was a doctor of science from the
University of Texas and a law graduate. From 1993 to 2009, he was a
researcher at the Ecole nationale supérieure des techniques supérieures
(Ensta). In cooperation with Richard Stallman, a major figure in free
software, Francis Muguet developed the concept of \"global patronage\"
in 2009. This mechanism for financing creation on the Internet, designed
to counter the mechanism of what would become the Hadopi law, proposed
to facilitate donations from Internet users to artists, rather than
repress illegal downloading. A society for the acceptance and
distribution of donations (SARD), adopting the principles of global
patronage, was created in September. Very involved in Internet
governance, Francis Muguet also proposed technical solutions to open the
domain name system to more competition. This system, which allows the
unique numbers of computers\' IP addresses to be associated with the
known nominative addresses of Internet users, is managed by ICANN, an
American organization. Francis Muguet tested the viability of his
research with the International Telecommunications Union in Geneva, and
as a privately funded research director at the University of Geneva.
Chairman of the civil society working group on scientific information,
and coordinator of the group on patents, trademarks and copyright at the
World Summit on the Information Society in Geneva (December 2003), then
in Tunis (November 2005), he managed to have free access to scientific
information included in the document. Committed to multilingualism on
the Internet, he was also active in the Global Network for Linguistic
Diversity. In France, he was one of the 40 co-founders of the French
Internet Society. Laurent Checola

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1169

French researcher Francis Muguet was found dead on Wednesday, October
14, in his Paris apartment, probably the victim of a heart attack. Born
on April 30, 1955 in Paris, he was a doctor of science from the
University of Texas and a law graduate. From 1993 to 2009, he was a
researcher at the Ecole nationale supérieure des techniques supérieures
(Ensta). In cooperation with Richard Stallman, a major figure in free
software, Francis Muguet developed the concept of \"global patronage\"
in 2009. This mechanism for financing creation on the Internet, designed
to counter the mechanism of what would become the Hadopi law, proposed
to facilitate donations from Internet users to artists, rather than
repress illegal downloading. A society for the acceptance and
distribution of donations (SARD), adopting the principles of global
patronage, was created in September. Very involved in Internet
governance, Francis Muguet also proposed technical solutions to open the
domain name system to more competition. This system, which allows the
unique numbers of computers\' IP addresses to be associated with the
known nominative addresses of Internet users, is managed by ICANN, an
American organization. Francis Muguet tested the viability of his
research with the International Telecommunications Union in Geneva, and
as a privately funded research director at the University of Geneva.
Chairman of the civil society working group on scientific information,
and coordinator of the group on patents, trademarks and copyright at the
World Summit on the Information Society in Geneva (December 2003), then
in Tunis (November 2005), he managed to have free access to scientific
information included in the document. Committed to multilingualism on
the Internet, he was also active in the Global Network for Linguistic
Diversity. In France, he was one of the 40 co-founders of the French
Internet Society. Félix Luna The Argentine writer Félix Luna died in
Buenos Aires on November 5, at the age of 84. Abroad, he was known as
the lyricist for Ariel Ramirez, the composer of Misa criolla (\"Creole
Mass\"). Together, they wrote Navidad nuestra (\"Our Christmas\") and
the famous song Alfonsina y el mar, popularized by Mercedes Sosa. Born
in Buenos Aires on September 30, 1925, he had also become widely known
in his country for his work popularizing history, which he began with
the monthly Todo es historia, launched in 1967, in the midst of the
military dictatorship. \"I thought that a history magazine would satisfy
the curiosity of people concerned with politics,\" he would say. This
work was extended to radio and television. A professor at the University
of Buenos Aires, Félix Luna has written some twenty works, including El
45 (1968) on the advent of Peronism, a Peron and his time in three
volumes (1984), a Complete History of the Argentines in ten volumes
(1996). His main bestseller, Soy Roca (1989), mixes history and fiction,
evoking a great Argentine president of the late 19th century using a
first-person narration. Under the presidency of Raul Alfonsin, Félix
Luna was Secretary of Culture (1986-1989).

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1170

Users of Druide informatique\'s linguistic suite, Antidote, will not be
lost in the interface of this tool when switching from the RX version to
the HD version. While the mechanics have been greatly improved, the
interface has simply been reworked to make room for the new functions.
The first interesting element is the ability to directly correct a
single word or sentence in the corrector interface. The correction tool
works quickly and efficiently on both Mac and PC with word processing
software such as those in the Microsoft Office suite, or page layout
software such as Quark or InDesing, or even free software such as Open
Office and Neo Office, even with the Explorer and Firefox browsers.
\"anti-OOPS!\" The \"Anti-Oups!\" technology, for the main email
software, works very well with Mail software on Mac or Outlook on PC. On
the other hand, with Entourage for Mac, I did not have conclusive
results. In addition to the function of correcting messages before
sending, Antidote adds this famous \"Anti-Oups!\" to avoid forgetting
the attachment. This is a brilliant idea. Another interesting element
comes with the consultation of the online encyclopedia Wikipedia to
learn more about a concept, a word or an idea. Druide puts the warning
that it is not responsible for the online content. This is perfect,
because we cannot validate beyond any doubt what is written by Internet
users in Wikipedia. This gives an interesting additional avenue of
exploration, especially since the consultation is done directly in the
Antidote interface. As with the direct correction in the interface, the
consultation of Wikipedia is done without leaving the software. Another
very good idea. Among the other new features, there is the performance
of the filters of the analysis \"prism\", the addition of the historical
guide which gives the evolution of a word over time with the etymology
of 90,000 words. At the same time, there is a new dictionary of 6000
illustrations of the Visuel nano dictionary, but you can integrate the
Dictionnaire visuel de Québec Amérique by purchasing the module on the
Druide website. Antidote HD deserves an excellent rating for its
qualities and ease of use in all linguistic sauces. The software works
in Mac, Linux and PC environments. Cost of the update: \$70. The full
version on DVD sells for \$130. Rating: 5 stars ytherrien@lesoleil.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1171

Who has never scribbled some practical information on a city map? A
cross to indicate the exact location of their home, an arrow for the
recently created one-way streets, or the layout of new escape routes.
What if all these precious details, added by everyone, were grouped
together on a single map that would be distributed free of charge\...
This already exists online, for example with Google Maps, which Internet
users can complete as they wish, provided that they do not use it for
commercial purposes. Similarly, the GPS manufacturer TomTom \"asks its
users to update the database,\" observes Thierry Joliveau, a geographer
at the University of Saint-Etienne (Loire). The updating technique is
used in countries where maps remain imprecise and addresses imperfect.
For example, in Beirut, Lebanon, the map publisher Zawarib suggests that
residents report changes to the road network or the appearance of new
visual landmarks, such as stores. The main cartographic project based on
user contributions remains OpenStreetMap. Created in 2006 in the United
Kingdom, this geographic database functions as a \"Wikipedia of the
map\", with everyone being required to modify, clarify, or even
invalidate a base map available online. The document, more or less
detailed depending on the cities and countries depending on the
assiduity of local Internet users, is not the prettiest map, but it has
the advantage of being, like free software, usable without restriction.
Nicolas Dumoulin, 30, a computer scientist in Aubière (Puy-de-Dôme), in
the suburbs of Clermont-Ferrand, regularly completes the database of the
French version by adding the location of glass recycling containers,
pharmacies or mailboxes in his town. \"The printed maps distributed by
town halls are rarely complete and stop at the boundaries of the
towns\", he notes. While some \"mappers\" - as they call themselves -
use their GPS to position a road or path, others, on returning from a
walk, point out public toilets, cafes connected to a Wi-Fi access point
or the names given to buildings within a residence or university, data
that is essential to pedestrians but which does not appear on any map.
Anyone can take part in the project, provided they are computer literate
and accept the endless online discussions about whether or not to invent
a new symbol to materialize roads in poor condition, for example. In
practice, most contributors are men, students or thirty-somethings,
computer scientists and activists for free software. \"There are also a
lot of sportsmen, hiking enthusiasts,\" observes Mr. Dumoulin. They all
meet up for \"mapping parties\", literally \"mapping campaigns\" that
last a day and consist, sometimes with the encouragement of a local
authority, in covering an area as best they can. At the same time, the
services of certain States make data available to OpenStreetMap. It
includes American geographical surveys or the French land register, but
not the database of the National Geographic Institute (IGN) which
jealously guards its data. Contributors for their part refrain from
copying elements, even the most basic, found on commercial maps. \"You
have to base yourself on observations on the ground\", argues Guillaume
Allègre, 35, a mapper in Grenoble (Isère) for a few months. \"Sometimes,
existing maps are misleading\", he observes. Initially designed to help
motorists find their way, OpenStreetMap could be useful for cyclists, as
explained by Pascal Rigaux, in his twenties, a Parisian activist for the
association Mieux se déplacement à bicyclette. \"A detailed plan,
including cycle paths, impassable streets or dangerous places, such as
the Concorde, makes it possible to produce a reliable itinerary. The
tool has great potential,\" he assures. \"Ultimately, thanks to the
combination of geolocation and human contributions,\" specifies Thierry
Joliveau, \"we will be able to locate ourselves from the screen of our
mobile phone and do without the map. This abstract and complex object
will once again become a tool for maniacs,\" adds the geographer.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1172

Berardo Carboni, Italian filmmaker and author of the controversial film
Shooting Silvio (where the hero wants to assassinate the media tycoon
Berlusconi) has just finished his machinima feature film VolaVola, which
will be previewed at the Géode next Monday as part of the Atopic
festival. He tells us about the shooting. How did this project start? I
thought I would make a traditional film about virtual worlds and compare
the way the Internet generation lives with previous generations. Then I
read Mario Gerosa\'s book on Second Life, called him up and that was it.
Why did you choose machinima? At first, I thought I would use machinima
to make an animated storyboard for a traditional \"in real life\" film.
The resulting machinima was much more exciting than I had hoped. I ended
up considering it a film in its own right. Where was it shot? The film
was shot entirely in Second Life for two reasons. I fell in love with
some of the characters Gerosa described in his book. And Second Life is
the persistent world that gives the most possibilities for invention and
interaction with the creativity of other residents. How does filming in
a virtual world work? Mario introduced me to some famous avatars and
programmers. With the help of Fau Ferdinand, I started casting the
\"cast\" and crew for the film. By the end, I had assembled a group of
twenty avatar-actors and a team of ten technical artists from around the
world. We were all together on Second Life for eight months full-time.
We had our own virtual island where most of the sets were built for the
film by Stella Costello. We also used pre-existing locations by asking
the owners\' permission to film there. Stella also made most of the
props and we bought some from Second Life stores. Same for the costumes
and avatar designs (made by Honey Fairweather) and for the animations
programmed by Medhue Simoni. All the shooting and choice of locations
were done according to the needs of the story. I worked with Evo Szuyuan
who did the "machinimatrography" \[which is similar to the role of the
director of photography in a classic film, editor's note\]. What was
your experience as a director? It was strange. I am used to directing a
film in the real world, but in the virtual world I was a total noob,
which made my task difficult. But I had a wonderful team who fully
invested themselves and worked with passion. During the shooting, there
were even love stories between some avatars: on the last day, one of
them was crying and another told me that it was the most beautiful and
important experience of his life. Technically, everything was done with
the tools provided by Second Life, although we added some visual effects
in post-production. The camera work was done by Evo with a special
joystick. He was sitting next to me, so I knew exactly what we were
shooting and it was easy to give directions. We were also lucky enough
to use lipsync \[lip synchronization\] developed by the Second Life open
source community before it was even available in the official tools. Is
this machinima just the first step of the project? We will shoot another
version of VolaVola in the real world in 2010. The scenario will be
slightly different and will take place in Rome and Sicily. Shooting two
films with the same scenario was the original idea. The second film will
be more of a \"mixed reality\" film, because it will also incorporate
scenes shot in Second Life. I am also thinking about using augmented
reality techniques, allowing an avatar to move from the virtual world to
the physical world. What do you think of machinima as a cinematographic
technique? I think machinima is an opportunity for the future of
animation. The possibilities are incredible, it is very cheap. I think
we can go much further, make a kind of new interactive films. Something
that can\'t be reduced to animation or traditional cinema. The biggest
limitation for now is the animations, the movements of the avatars,
their facial expressions. It\'s still difficult to convey an emotion,
but it will probably improve very quickly.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1173

\"Fouquet\'s, here we come!\" Tonight, the restaurant on the
Champs-Elysées, symbol of Nicolas Sarkozy\'s election, is hosting the
release of the book La Bataille Hadopi. Some forty personalities
(politicians, teachers, lawyers, journalists, artists, sociologists,
etc.) are returning \"to the epic of a law that mobilized all citizens
around the problem and the future of the dissemination of works and
freedoms on the Internet.\" Among them, Jacques Attali, Daniel
Cohn-Bendit, Richard M. Stallman and Jérôme Bourreau-Guggenheim, who
intend to fight against \"a company that controls Internet techniques
and uses.\" Published by InLibroVeritas, under a free license, the book
will be available this evening as a free download (1) and sold, printed,
in three versions at 9, 19 and 49 euros. (1)
inlibroveritas.net/la-bataille-hadopi.html

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1174

Quebec, a city open\... to free software? The idea did not come from
Mayor Régis Labeaume or his opponents, but those who campaign in favor
of free software are asking candidates to take a first step in this
direction by signing the \"Free Software Pact\". Others have already
done so. Projet Montréal, the party led by Richard Bergeron, has already
adopted two resolutions at its convention to make Montreal the \"free
software capital of North America\", and to favor free software and open
standards during calls for tenders and software renewals, which is what
the pact recommends. The cities of Nanaimo, Toronto, Washington DC, San
Francisco and more recently Vancouver are no longer at the stage of
intentions. They have adopted open motions by which they commit to
making their databases accessible to citizens wherever possible, to
adopting open standards and to using free software as a matter of law.
The Association for the Collective Appropriation of Free Software
(FACIL) is demanding nothing less than a similar commitment from
candidates in the Quebec City elections. \"In a context of economic
crisis where the question of favouring local purchasing keeps coming up,
we want to remind people that using free software creates jobs locally
and strengthens the competitiveness of Quebec businesses,\" says Cyrille
Béraud, president of FACIL. \"We want to make elected officials aware
that using Microsoft or Apple products is not neutral for the community,
even if they are all quality products.\" delay While other large
Canadian cities have come out in favour of free software, Cyrille Béraud
is concerned about the delays taken by Quebec municipalities in terms of
electronic administration. \"We think it has an impact on democratic
life,\" he says. He gives the example of the scandals that have rocked
the Montreal administration. These are often cases related to
administrative management, he observes. New technologies put enormous
power in the hands of managers, but the use of open standards and free
software, as well as public access to data, will make municipal
management much more transparent, he says. \"Each project could be built
as a collaborative project thanks to the Internet. We could create a
forum, access the complete file, the financial impacts, ask citizens to
participate. The municipal council could even allow citizens to
participate via the Internet. This is already happening in some European
countries.\" passelin@lesoleil.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1175

London Special Envoy - Hosted by the London Film Festival, the \"Power
to the Pixel\" forum brought together for the third consecutive year
professionals in \"transmedia\", this nebula of audiovisual projects,
often interactive, available on all sorts of media, from the cinema to
the mobile phone, and which have proliferated since the advent of
Internet 2.0. In their most accomplished form, which is now whetting the
appetites of broadcasters (whether it be Orange\'s Transmedia Lab or
Michel Reilhac, the director of Arte France cinema), these projects have
a name: ARG (Alternate Reality Games). Swedish producer Martin Elricsson
presented The Truth about Marika, an ARG designed in response to a TV
series inspired by the true story of a young Swedish woman who
disappeared. It follows the investigation led by the \"real\" best
friend of the missing person, in this case a \"ractrice\" (interactive
actress) who goes looking for her in bars, rock concerts, political
meetings\... On the Internet, she publishes videos, collects advice from
Internet users, and even meets those who want to in the real world. In
theory, these ARGs have advantages: the possibility of building an
audience upstream through viral communication, of multiplying sources of
income with the different media. In practice, the first episode of
Breathe, the only ARG shown as part of the forum, demonstrated the
dangers of thinking about broadcasting without questioning the staging -
which was, in this case, discouragingly poor. This is not the least flaw
of these projects, whose authors, even if they know how to film, are
often their own distributors. The boundary between the creative process
and commercial considerations is therefore very porous. Beyond these
funny games, transmedia has proven to be a formidable promotional tool
for traditional cinema. Australian Nina Paley explained why and how she
chose to distribute her animated film Sita Sings the Blues as free
software, that is, for free, in theaters as well as on television or on
the Internet, and how she earned more money than with the offer that a
distributor was willing to make her. \"The more your film is seen, the
more people are willing to support you by buying T-shirts or limited
edition DVDs,\" she insists. \"Those who have distributed the film
sometimes offer me money, but in the form of support, not as
remuneration for copyright. » Another example is the environmental
documentary The Age of Stupid, which was the subject of a unique
screening on September 21 in some sixty countries, with live broadcast
from the \"green carpet\" in New York, of interventions by Moby, Thom
Yorke (Radiohead), and Kofi Annan, among others. Respectively director
and producer of the film, Franny Armstrong and Lizzie Gillett have shown
that this type of event promotes the distribution of films on
television, DVD and the Internet. The Age of Stupid can now be viewed by
anyone, thanks to an interface that calculates the rental price based on
the nationality and status of the renter, and the number of spectators
expected for the screening. At a time when the distribution sector is
more devastated than ever, these two initiatives outline two stimulating
paths for rethinking the distribution of independent cinema.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1176

Usually, when you go to an event about free software, you end up with a
horde of seasoned computer scientists helping beginners install a free
system in a very coca-rillettes-laptops atmosphere. So, when you read
the address of the Open World Forum, avenue George-V in Paris, a
stone\'s throw from the Champs-Elysées, there is a hint of change. In
the opulent premises of the Eurosites George-V, conferences and meetings
on the theme of free software were held at the end of last week, but in
a suit and tie version. A version that talks about turnover rather than
lines of code. Jean-Noël de Galzain, president of the Open World Forum,
assumes: \"It\'s an international event in a central location in Paris.
We also want to prove that the free economy is an economy of the future,
which is still only in its infancy.\" The program includes workshops,
round tables and many informal meetings. \"We also want to put SMEs and
investors in touch,\" explains Jean-Noël de Galzain. But today\'s
start-ups have little in common with those of 1999. It\'s a bit like the
speculative Internet bubble had given way to a more sustainable software
economy. This is because free software, with its philosophy and rules,
is based on innovation, more than on the hope of big profits in the
short term. If free software is attractive, it\'s because it offers
obvious advantages. For users, it\'s the reasonable cost of access to
the software used (which is not necessarily all free), but above all the
assurance of constant evolution to remain technologically at the
forefront. On the software publishers\' side, it can also be tempting.
They may lose out on the price of their licenses, but they gain more
loyal users and, above all, access to a community capable of investing
in technical improvements and in communicating about the products. One
wonders why there are still proprietary software\... \"It\'s not as
simple as that,\" says Andrew Aitken, co-founder of Olliance, a company
specializing in the transition to free systems. There are a few precise
rules to follow if you hope to be able to move to open source. First,
you have to meet a real need, otherwise, no one will be interested. Then
you have to build a community, which is probably the hardest part.
Finally, you have to continue to innovate constantly. If these
conditions are not met, it can be very dangerous to abandon the
proprietary model.\" And when he explains, methodologically, the very
concrete solutions for creating a community around an IT solution, we
feel that the ideals that motivated the pioneers of free software are
far away. Is it really free software, anyway? Andrew Aitken admits:
\"When I\'m facing a client, I prefer to use the word open-source.\"
Historical reminder. The free software movement comes from the GNU
project, launched by Richard Stallman in the early 80s, which defined
the four fundamental freedoms: being able to run the software, study it,
distribute it and redistribute modified versions. This movement has
allowed the emergence and development of ambitious projects, in
particular because the developers who get involved in it know that they
are working for the common good. We can cite Linux, which today allows a
large part of Internet servers to run, including those of Google,
Firefox - the Internet browser - or Gimp, an alternative to Photoshop
software. But for some, the strict rules of Stallman\'s version of free
software limit the economic viability of the whole. At the end of the
90s, we see the emergence of the open-source movement, which keeps a
good part of the original philosophy (notably the opening of the code),
but by softening it to make the whole thing more pragmatic. A compromise
that divides a lot within the free community. In the large room on the
ground floor, it\'s buffet time. Between the appetizers, the discussions
are lively. We talk about the economic model, the flourishing future and
necessary investments. In one corner, we find, at the Canonical stand,
the members of the Ubuntu-fr community, who animate everything that
happens around the free system in France. They do this in their free
time and don\'t have much to do with the emerging economy, which is
today at the center of the debates. They are in T-shirts. \"It\'s not
bad that this kind of event takes place, it gives a certain legitimacy
and visibility to the movement, confides Frédéric, from Ubuntu-fr. But
we\'re also here to remind them that without the guys in the T-shirts,
they wouldn\'t be here talking business.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1177

Mark Shuttleworth is the president of Canonical, which he founded in
2004. He is behind the Ubuntu distribution, which, among other things,
tries to get the general public to use the free Linux system. He made
his fortune by selling his company specializing in computer security for
the sum of 575 million dollars (392 million euros) in 1999. In 2002, he
was the second \"space tourist\" and spent a week aboard the
international ISS. Since his return to Earth, he has embarked on an
ambitious and slightly crazy adventure: to offer a free, and above all
attractive, alternative to Windows. Why did you decide to embark on the
Ubuntu adventure? For me, it is the convergence of three interests. I am
interested in economics, societal issues and technology. Free software
represents the software part of a major change in society. A change due
to the fact that people are now connected to each other. Connected by
voice, but also in their work, in their ideas, in their thinking. And
these connections cause a disruption in the economy, in politics, in
civil society, in content\... Which makes the music industry evolve, the
encyclopedia industry, the knowledge industry, the education industry.
In the free software community, we call on people who can be anywhere in
the world. Passionate, enthusiastic and experts in a particular field.
We allow them to collaborate to create a product that corresponds to
their expertise. It could be the Firefox browser, the Linux kernel or
the MySQL database. What Ubuntu allows is to bring together all of this
expertise and make it available for use by anyone. It amplifies the
impact of each of these groups. It\'s interesting, because we have the
means to transform the software industry. It\'s a gigantic industry.
Canonical doesn\'t have the ambition to replace Microsoft, but I think
we can succeed in creating a new model. That\'s really exciting. For me,
I\'m in a privileged position where I can choose which challenges I want
to take on. So I\'ve taken on the hardest one of all, which is also the
most ambitious. If I fail, at least I\'ll have had the satisfaction of
having tried. If I succeed, I can be happy that I\'ve had an impact on
this evolution. It seems a bit utopian\... Some of what we do is
certainly utopian, but we\'re also very pragmatic. For example, we\'re
not fundamentalists about software licensing. We work every day with
proprietary software developers, like Oracle or IBM. We would even be
happy to work with Microsoft if there was a constructive way for us to
do it. We\'re not just driven by an ideology, we also have an economic
ambition. Canonical is not profitable right now, but I think we\'re
going to get there. In terms of social change, maybe it was a pipe dream
five years ago when we started, but today I see these changes happening
all around me. I see the impact of what we\'re doing. It\'s not a pipe
dream anymore. How does a free software economy work? If you look at the
software economy, part of it is based on licenses, on selling the right
to use software. Canonical didn\'t write most of the code that\'s used
in Ubuntu. It\'s written in Firefox, in MySQL, etc. We\'re not going to
charge for that code! But another part of this industry is based on
expertise and experience. So our business model is based on services.
Part of those services are provided online, part of them are provided in
person. So we help institutions or companies that want to use Ubuntu.
But if a company has this expertise in-house and they don\'t need us,
they have no reason to pay us. What about the general public? If we want
to change the way people think about the software world, we have to
change the software they use. The experts, the people who run data
centers, for example, are already convinced, they use Linux every day.
What I want to do is change the way people who are not experts think
about it, which is why it is so important to get to personal computers.
Is that the goal in the next few years? In a few years, I want to be
able to walk into a store and see computers that are sold with Ubuntu
next to those that are sold with Windows. I would like the average
consumer to take some time to think about the system they want and
sometimes choose Ubuntu, because of what the software offers. I would
like to play a role in the emergence of an operating system that is so
easy and so enjoyable to use that everyone would want to try it. Not
because it\'s the cheapest platform; not because it\'s recommended by
experts; not because it\'s secure, but because it\'s beautiful and
exciting. It has to be the future of software that people want to use.
Then, we have to grow the business side of Canonical by offering
services to governments and large organizations. Finally, I mostly want
to have fun, to do what I love to do. With all that, I have plenty to
keep me busy. Listening to you, it seems like free software is a
grassroots movement and that the fight is almost won\... If I were sure
that free software was going to win, I wouldn\'t spend so much time
working on it. Because it could win without me. What I am sure of is
that it\'s a fun fight and that it is possible to win. Free software
offers such value, such innovation, that there are real reasons for
people to choose it. And I believe I can make a difference in that
regard.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1178

Already available for Android smartphones (an open source operating
system designed by Google, free and open to all manufacturers or
operators) and on Apple iPhones, applications allow you to display the
streets you have visited on your mobile phone screen, with all the
information concerning the real estate market superimposed: two rooms
for sale, studio for rent, such and such surface area, such and such
price, etc. The first to date, the Meilleursagents.com (photo) and
Seloger.com applications are currently sharing this fledgling market.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1179

It was as I dropped off my suitcase at home today that I realized how
far I had come in the past week. A world tour that I was taking part in
from Shenyang, China, as part of the 5th Internet and Multimedia Summit
(IMMS). An event organized by the International Federation of Multimedia
Associations and the Shenyang municipal government, under the auspices
of the Chinese government and the United Nations. A virtual world tour
organized by the president of FIAM, Hervé Fischer, who wanted to provide
the participants, mostly Chinese, with an overview of the planet in
terms of government and commercial projects as well as the use of the
Internet and multimedia, particularly in the context of video games,
mobility and digital production as a whole. Three days of presentations
to illustrate the dynamism in these areas, despite an economic crisis
that has affected all continents. Cooperation was discussed,
particularly with the presence of Commonwealth and Francophonie
organizations. The latter was particularly notable for its plea for
global investment in free software. The participants of the meeting saw
the digital efforts of the two linguistic organizations, but also their
lack of consultation. A situation that could change in light of the
discussions undertaken between the representatives of the organizations
in Shenyang. The role of the UN Many UN agencies had also made the trip
to present their direct interventions on the ground in terms of
computerization of NGOs and the populations served by them throughout
the planet. Political initiatives, but also concrete programs to ensure
that populations can benefit from the possibilities of digital
technology on the economic, social and educational levels and avoid too
great a digital divide. The SMIM 2009 was also marked by the theme of
innovation in the multimedia and creative design industries with many
presentations that clearly illustrate the Chinese desire to move from
the famous \"made in China\" to \"created in China\". And in this sense,
the presentations by Quebecers Denys Tremblay, from the Université du
Québec à Chicoutimi and the NAD Centre, as well as that of Luc
Couchesne, from the SAT, illustrated the know-how and the desire for
collaboration between these Quebec institutions and the new Chinese
digital industry. Moreover, holding this summit in Shenyang was no
coincidence. The city of 7 million inhabitants, 30 million with its
suburbs, is seeking to develop a new sector of expertise. The fourth
largest city in China, recognized until now as a major industrial and
manufacturing zone in China, this northeastern city wants to fully
embark on the digital era and is taking drastic measures to do so, by
creating a vast digital industrial park to accommodate new Chinese
creative companies, but also to welcome international partners.
Investing in China In this context, the presentation by the Chinese head
of the Caisse de dépôt et placement du Québec was appropriate, while
Patrice Dallaire, the former delegate general of Québec in Beijing,
confirmed to Chinese representatives Québec\'s interest in investing
more than a billion dollars in China, particularly in the real estate
sector. A way to continue Québec\'s presence in China that began under
the administration of Lucien Bouchard and Bernard Landry. For my part, I
was invited to provide a portrait of the development of cell phones on
the North American continent in the context of the emergence of the new
mobile generation. This generation of young users who entered school
almost with a cell phone in hand and who today could no longer do
without this device that provides a link with their friends and parents.
After the highly acclaimed presentation by Toronto professor Derrick de
Kerckhove, the heir to Marshall McLuhan, on the interconnection between
intelligence and practice in the digital context, the appearance by
Senegalese artist Oumar Sall, from Groupe 30 Afrique, was probably the
most powerful moment. The Summit organization had decided to bring the
participants back down to earth after three days of reflection by
inviting this artist who had only one wish: to find help to use
computers, cell phones and digital music players to share a message of
peace on the African continent. According to him, there is still a
window of five to ten years to implement concrete actions before
exasperation takes over a large part of the population as in certain
parts of the Arab world. All the technological development would be
useless if the continent had to continue to experience wars and revolts
as in the past, a past that is still not so distant. \*\*\*
bguglielminetti@ledevoir.com \*\*\* Bruno Guglielminetti is a producer
and new technology columnist at Radio-Canada. He is also the editor of
Carnet techno (www.radio-canada.ca/techno).

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1180

The other day, in the profuse locker of a second-hand bookseller on the
banks of the Seine, we came across a unique book, Le Phénomène humain,
by Pierre Teilhard de Chardin. Chance does things well. Teilhard has
aroused renewed curiosity since the prophets of the Internet presented
him as one of their own. A curious destiny, an unexpected return to
grace. Who would have predicted that half a century after his death in
1955, at the age of 73, this Jesuit priest, rather poorly regarded by
the Vatican, would be considered a visionary? As a theoretician of the
links that, every day, connect men more closely together. For the
Church, he reeked of sulfur. For his contemporaries, he was a virtual
unknown. Teilhard only emerged from anonymity the day after his death,
when a handful of the faithful took his manuscripts to the Seuil
publishing house. He himself had refused, out of discipline, the Vatican
being reluctant to grant him its imprimatur. The man had bearing and
manners, inherited from his father, an aristocrat who had graduated from
the École des Chartes, a gentleman farmer by atavism. Raised in
Auvergne, Teilhard developed a passion for geology and mineralogy at a
young age. A renowned paleontologist, co-discoverer of Sinanthropus, the
fossil man of China, he was elected to the Academy of Sciences in 1950.
A scholar therefore, but also a philosopher and a theologian, with the
faith of a child of Mary. These multiple facets did not always find
agreement - the man was subject to sudden depressions. But they give all
their value to his intuitions. Published in 1955, The Human Phenomenon
is the culmination of the scholarly priest\'s reflections on the origin
and future of man. It is composed of articles and conferences written or
delivered at the end of the 1930s. Their modernity is obvious. Unlike
the Church, which had long been hesitant on the subject, Teilhard was an
enthusiastic Darwinist. He referred to the laws of evolution and
extended them, explaining that after the appearance of man, an equally
irresistible process was set in motion, which mixed psyche and matter.
And pushed humanity towards ever greater convergence. Teilhard speaks of
\"socialization\" to designate this propensity of humans to organize
themselves into ever larger communities, increasingly dependent on each
other. He calls \"Noosphere\" these conscious groups that surround the
planet with ever more thoughtful thought (noos means \"thought\" in
Greek). Early on, as we understand, Teilhard had the intuition that
modern means of communication, from aircraft to radio waves, would
foster a \"collective consciousness of humanity.\" Here we are. The
Internet completes this process. Teilhard was right. We are not obliged
to subscribe to all his conclusions, which mix scientific certainties,
anticipatory hypotheses and Christian faith. Teilhard, for example,
explains that the Omega point towards which the Noosphere converges
according to him is the god of the Catholics. Whether or not they agree
with this article of faith, many media theorists recognize a debt to
him. In The Gutenberg Galaxy (1962), for example, the Canadian Marshall
McLuhan refers to him to affirm that \"the new culture of electricity,\"
opposed to the printing press, gives \"a tribal basis to our lives.\"
Like Teilhard, even if their words differ, he speaks of the planet as a
\"global village.\" Very new age, today\'s references to Teilhard\'s
work are sometimes complicated by approximations. For some, the
Noosphere and cyberspace are one and the same, when they do not enlist
the austere Jesuit under the banner of free software\... The best thing,
in order not to get lost on these side roads, is to refer to the work
itself. Without waiting for the chance of a visit to a second-hand
bookseller. Teilhard\'s main works are available in paperback (Le Seuil,
\"Points/Sagesses\").

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1181

There was excitement in the art world last spring: David Hockney, 71,
the most influential British painter of the 20th century, a figure of
English pop art, was painting on his iPhone! \"Hockney is addicted and
has even invested in a mini wooden easel to rest his iPhone on,\"
reports the Telegraph. A Bloomberg journalist describes him as
\"digitally shaving\" with his high-tech toy that goes
\"brrrrzzzzzzzt.\" But it is mainly the application that allows him to
doodle on the screen with his finger (Brushes App) that keeps him busy:
\"I draw flowers every day and send them to my friends, so they have
fresh flowers every morning.\" Hockney is not what you would call a
newbie when it comes to new technologies, since twenty years ago he was
already making prints with a fax, collages with Polaroids and drawings
on a computer. Just like Warhol, who was asked to launch the Amiga with
great fanfare in 1985. He used the personal computer\'s graphic palette
to paint live in front of an ecstatic press the portrait of Debbie
Harry, singer of Blondie. Today it is the iPhone\'s turn to be knighted
by Hockney, \"a consecration, if any were needed, of digital technology
as a medium of contemporary art\", we read in the New York Times, which
speaks of a \"small sensation\". Just that. The many artists who have
been using and questioning these technologies for a long time will not
be offended. \"energy\". Apple could not have dreamed of better
advertising for its touchscreen mobile. The bouquets scribbled by the
painter are not, however, the only artistic experiments on this
platform. Since Apple released its iPhone software development kit (SDK)
in July 2008, it has been possible to create applications, which are
exclusively sold on iTunes or the App Store. The \"apps\", most of which
range in price from free to €1.99, offer a new distribution platform
(with its 40 million users) for artists. Android, Palm webOS, Blackberry
and Nokia are not yet close to competing. \"I am pleased with the number
of downloads,\" explains Lia, a pioneer of Net art, who has just adapted
one of her online works for the iPhone. \"In the 90s, people like me
produced (and still produce) art online completely free for anyone with
Internet access. The very affordable price of the iPhone application
(€2.39, less than a beer in a bar) is a way to recover some of the
energy that was needed to create the piece.\" Pocket money, then, but
not yet a business model. Especially since 30% is paid to Apple, which
has complete freedom to accept or reject an \"app\". Still in its
infancy, what some already call \"iPhone art\" is trying to gain
visibility among the 75,000 \"apps\" available for download in the App
Store, as essential as snorting a line of coke, playing the harmonica
or, more prosaically, finding a restaurant. It is because \"Apple does
not yet offer an art section in its store and it is almost impossible to
find them on your own\" that Lia has started to list artistic \"apps\"
that she likes on a dedicated site, Iphoneart.org. It includes her own
creation PhiLia 01, which allows the user to generate abstract
audiovisual compositions by touching or tilting the screen. \"The iPhone
is another way to distribute my software art, it has qualities that a
classic computer doesn\'t have: multitouch, the accelerometer (which
allows you to move, shake the object), and it\'s very easy to transport,
which means you can take the work with you,\" explains the Austrian
artist who partly developed this application with the open source
software Openframeworks and is already working on PhiLia 02. Sound toy.
Her site offers about ten applications including that of Miltos Manetas,
digital artist and painter, who also adapted his successful website,
Jacksonpollock.org, into a mobile application. Instead of clicking, you
tap the screen to create multi-colored drips. In the same genre, Fat Tag
by Theo Watson allows you to draw graffiti that liquefy. More literary,
For All Season by Andreas Müller offers a poetic text per season that
morphs into abstract animations made of letters. Pretty but rather
anecdotal: you download them, manipulate them for 5 minutes and never
come back to them again. More sophisticated in terms of digital
wallpaper, Reflect, programmed by the pope of web design, the American
Joshua Davis, allows you to generate infinite kaleidoscopic patterns
with your fingertips, each user obtaining a unique creation. Other
pieces combine sounds and images in fun interfaces such as Eliss by
Steph Thirion, both a sound toy and a musical creation tool made of
small \"planets\" to assemble. Or Synthpond by the New York artist Zach
Gage, consisting of placing objects from which emanate colored circles
that create sounds when they meet another object. A frenetic sampler,
Jason Forrest has just released a pocket synthesizer, Star6, which took
almost a year to develop. A real live musical instrument, the €5.99
application lets you manipulate sound loops and apply a whole range of
effects to them. The program offers ready-to-use samples concocted by
the Berlin musician, but also lets you download his sounds, record and
share his creations. \"The next step is to allow you to stream sounds
via Bluetooth, which would allow several people to play together,\"
Jason Forrest explains to De-Bug magazine. Indeed, these applications do
not currently make much use of certain specific features of the tool, in
particular its mobility. The artist Jonah Bruckner Cohen, who has also
listed artistic applications for the Rhizome site, cites RJDJ of Reality
Jockey who uses the iPhone as a generative sound system. The application
uses the iPhone\'s microphone to capture ambient sounds during the day.
With headphones on, you choose one of the \"atmospheres\" proposed by
musicians and then get going. The sounds captured live by the microphone
and/or the speed of movement feed and influence the music played.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1182

Series, films, music and photos, it\'s starting to be a mess in the
computer. And what a shame to leave all that in disarray, when you could
watch these pretty things on your TV thanks to a dedicated machine. But
until now, this solution was far from affordable. This is changing with
the arrival of Nettops that you plug into your TV, compact and silent
computers (and fixed counterparts of Netbooks, these small low-cost
laptops). At less than 400 euros, they make perfect multimedia centers.
You just need to install XBMC, a free and open source software that will
take care of classifying and making accessible the audiovisual clutter.
Reference. XBMC, for Xbox Media Center, was born in 2002, shortly after
the release of the Xbox, Microsoft\'s first console. Innovative when it
was released - it had a hard drive and an Internet connection as
standard - it is based on relatively standard computer components. The
result was not long in coming, the console\'s protections were quickly
bypassed, opening the way to piracy, but especially to the development
of applications designed by users. Born from the merger of several video
player projects, XBMC developed rapidly, transforming the console into a
low-cost living room PC. To free itself from the limitations of the
aging console, the software was put on Linux (free operating system) in
2006, then in 2008 on Windows and Mac, resulting in a tenfold increase
in audience. The project is now run by around twenty volunteer members
spread across the planet. Major decisions are made by an elected \"board
of directors\", but developers are free to tackle any innovation as long
as they have notified the others. Thus, XBMC has become a reference for
media center software. It is very simple to use. After installation, you
just have to indicate where the media files (audio, video, photo) are
and it takes care of classifying them. But it doesn\'t stop there. It
downloads posters, summaries and other information taken directly from
the Net just by analyzing the name of the file. Result: an interface
that is pleasant to look at, designed to be used on a television and
controlled with a remote control. \"Skins\". But the strength of XBMC
lies above all in its community, these hundreds of enthusiasts who
modify or enrich the software via plugins - which will for example allow
you to watch your favorite shows, retrieved more or less legally from
the websites of the channels - or skins that modify the appearance
(photos above). The user sometimes wipes the plaster a little, but it is
the assurance for XBMC to stay years ahead of better known commercial
software like Microsoft\'s Windows Media Center. http://xbmc.org

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1183

The video logbook in Greenland by Laure Noualhat, a journalist in the
Earth service, who accompanied Greenpeace on a scientific mission for
two weeks. Video game chat. At 5 p.m., ask your questions to our
specialist Erwan Cario. \"I have the flu A\". Testimonies to listen to
on LibéLabo.fr. Cries and whispers. A photo gallery on the exhibition of
23 female artists held at the Centre Wallonie-Bruxelles in Paris.
Interview with guitarist Biréli Lagrène, to read on the blog \"Ça va
jazzer\" by Bruno Pfeiffer. Drupal brick by brick: how a community of
developers builds free software. On Ecrans.fr. And always the latest
news on Libe.fr, information near you on LibéVilles, blogs and
discussion forums.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1184

On July 3, 2009, Serge Aleynikov, a financial software programmer, was
arrested by the FBI at Newark Airport, near New York, while returning
from Chicago. He was accused by his former employer, the investment bank
Goldman Sachs, of stealing very valuable computer programs. That same
evening, the police raided his home and seized his computers. Until
then, this 39-year-old computer scientist had led an uneventful life. He
lived in a beautiful house in a posh suburb of New York, with his wife
and their three young daughters. After a brilliant career, he was hired
by Goldman Sachs in May 2007 with a salary of \$400,000 per year
(280,000 euros). A fine career for this Russian immigrant, who arrived
in the United States at the age of 21 with a modest diploma from the
Moscow Institute of Transport. In June 2009, Serge Aleynikov decided to
leave Goldman Sachs and go to work for a Chicago-based financial firm
called Teza Tech - a start-up that had not yet started operating, but
which was already promising to triple his salary. Teza\'s founder,
Mikhail Malyshev, is also of Russian origin. He had just left a senior
position at Citadel, the large hedge fund also based in Chicago, to
start his own business. In early June, just before leaving Goldman
Sachs, Serge Aleynikov made copies of some software he was working on,
then uploaded them to a free storage website, as well as to Teza\'s
server. Fifteen days later, during an audit of its security systems,
Goldman Sachs discovered the unauthorized transfer, and filed a
complaint. During his interrogation, Serge Aleynikov stated that he
believed he had downloaded only free software (in the public domain),
and had inadvertently copied some programs belonging to Goldman Sachs.
He claims that he never intended to sell them or give them to anyone.
However, the prosecutor asks the judge to remand him in custody, a very
rare decision in this type of case, insinuating that he is part of an
international spy network: the site on which he sent the software is
hosted by a server located in Germany, and belongs to a man living in
London, whose name sounds Indian. In addition, he still has family in
Russia, where he goes regularly. Finally, the judge decides to release
Serge Aleynikov, against a huge bail of 750,000 dollars (525,000 euros).
He is not allowed to leave the New York region and must not access the
famous stolen software under any circumstances. Shortly after, he is
unemployed, Teza gives up hiring him. At the same time, another legal
case has started in Chicago. The hedge fund Citadel is suing Mikhail
Malyshev, its former employee who recently created Teza, for violating a
non-compete clause in his employment contract. Citadel\'s lawyers are
referring to the Aleynikov case, which they interpret as an aggravating
circumstance: if Malyshev had decided to hire a software thief, it is
probably because he had robbed Citadel in the same way, or was about to
do so. Citadel is outright demanding that Malyshev be banned for life
from any professional activity in finance. In general, these battles
between large investment banks and small start-ups remain confidential.
But this one is making headlines in the financial press, because, at the
beginning of summer 2009, the media and some politicians are waging a
new campaign against Goldman Sachs, accusing it of making gigantic
profits while the country is sinking into crisis. The Aleynikov and
Malyshev cases raise two questions: why is this stolen software so
valuable? And how do banks manage to make so much money in the middle of
a recession? By consulting the CVs of Aleynikov and Malyshev on the
Internet and the forums in which they participate, journalists discover
that both are specialists in high-frequency trading. Since the complete
computerization of stock market transactions, the ultimate weapon of
speculators is speed. Ultra-fast buying and selling programs, based on
increasingly complex algorithms and running on increasingly powerful
computers, have become decisive tools. We are witnessing a fierce arms
race between operators. In 2008, more than a quarter of stock market
transactions in the United States were carried out using algorithms. The
latency time (the time between the issuance of an order and its
execution) is of the order of a millisecond, and the profits thus made
are estimated in billions of dollars per year. Supercomputers scan
dozens of platforms in milliseconds to detect market trends, then place
orders at the speed of light, leaving traditional investors, who are
much slower, behind. They can also detect the ceiling price set by a
buyer (the price above which he stops buying a stock). Immediately, they
snap up all the available shares before the legitimate buyer has had
time to act, and resell them to him at a higher price, generally at the
maximum price - that is, 1 cent below his ceiling. In addition, the
various stock exchanges, which are increasingly in competition, pay a
bonus to any operator who chooses their platform as a priority to launch
transactions on a stock. Here too, the fastest trader is rewarded, even
if he made a quick round trip for the sole purpose of collecting the
bonus. To meet this demand for maximum speed, small automated trading
platforms have emerged, operating with a few dozen employees and
installed in cheap offices, far from Wall Street. Some have already
become formidable competitors for traditional stock exchanges. In July
2009, the New York Stock Exchange only carried out 28% of stock market
transactions in the United States, the Nasdaq 21%. Two companies unknown
to the general public, BATS in Kansas City (Missouri) and Direct Edge in
Jersey City (New Jersey) are vying to establish themselves as the third
largest American stock exchange, each with 10% to 12% of the market,
depending on the calculation method. BATS (Better Alternative Trading
System) was created in 2006 by about fifteen computer scientists and
engineers from the Midwest, like an ordinary small start-up. In one
year, the company has made a name for itself among hedge funds, thanks
to its low costs and its execution speed: 1 to 3 milliseconds per
transaction. Today, BATS processes more than 1 billion shares per day.
For the month of June 2009, the value of its transactions reached 540
billion dollars. Attracted by its success, clients such as Citigroup,
Credit Suisse, Deutsche Bank and Morgan Stanley have bought shares in
its capital. Recently, BATS opened a small office in New York, just
across from the Stock Exchange. The geeks (fans of new technologies)
have set out to conquer Wall Street. For its part, Direct Edge now
claims more than 11% of the market in volume, against only 7% in
January. Its shareholders include Citadel, Knight, JP Morgan and Goldman
Sachs, who make extensive use of its services. BATS acquired legal
status as a full-fledged stock exchange in August 2008. Direct Edge
applied for it in May 2009. Among the innovative services offered by
these platforms, the most controversial is flash orders. This consists
of letting a few good clients consult orders on certain securities a
fraction of a second before they are made public. These privileged ones
have a head start on other investors. Flash orders were introduced by
the Chicago Board Options Exchange and Direct Edge in 2006. In 2009,
Nasdaq and BATS imitated them. By revealing to the public this new way
of getting rich quickly, the media revived the scandal, because, for
many observers, flash orders are similar to insider trading. The
Democratic senator from New York State, Charles Schumer, has made it a
personal crusade. He wrote to the SEC (Securities and Exchange
Commission, the regulator of the American stock exchanges) to demand the
elimination of flash orders. If the SEC does not act, the senator
threatens to introduce a bill to ban them. The SEC responds that it will
study the problem, as part of a broader investigation into other
practices, in particular dark pools (private markets where transactions
are anonymous, and where a variant of flash orders is practiced). In
August, Nasdaq and BATS announced that they would voluntarily abandon
flash orders and kept their word as of September 1st. On the other hand,
the CEO of Direct Edge, William O\'Brien, has multiplied interviews to
explain that flash orders are a beneficial innovation, and that he will
offer this paid service to all interested professionals. For its part,
the SEC recognizes that its investigation is only in its early stages
and that no binding measures will be taken in the short term. On the
judicial front, the Aleynikov case seems to be bogged down in a
procedural battle. As of early September, Serge Aleynikov had still not
been formally charged.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1185

NOBODY saw it coming. But in a few months, Twitter has established
itself as the most popular and useful social network of the moment. Two
years ago, no one really understood the point of \"saying what you\'re
doing\" in 140 characters - the original principle of this microblogging
platform. But users quickly diverted this question into a broader
invitation to share thoughts, links, photos, various requests - from a
restaurant for the evening to choosing a bank. Twitter has thus become a
source of information as valuable as a search engine like Google. With a
real advantage over its powerful elder: the feedback of information in
real time. Twitter has thus imposed this tempo on the entire Web. The
media have adopted the service to recount events minute by minute. The
social network, like Facebook, has transformed its home page into a news
feed where the \"news\" of members and their entourage are chased by
fresher news every second. The development of Internet access from a
mobile and the appearance of variants has greatly facilitated the growth
of this real-time Internet or real-time web. A service like Qik allows
you to broadcast videos on the Internet live from your mobile. And while
Twitter is preparing to integrate the geolocation of messages into its
site, a service like Foursquare already offers to limit the sending of
messages to people located within a limited perimeter, to better target
its information. With these practices, communication on the Internet has
become a sort of continuous information chain of one\'s digital life.
The concept of lifestreaming, inaugurated in 1997 at Yale University by
Eric Freeman and David Gelertner to talk about the classification of
electronic documents, is being brought back into fashion. It is
undoubtedly at the crossroads of these two uses - real time and digital
life thread - that the next Twitter will be found. Google on the
offensive Among the possible candidates is a site like Tumblr. This
microblogging platform allows you to publish a short message like on
Twitter, but also a simple photo, a link, a video, a quote from an
article. Aggregators also have their chance: the Storytlr site allows
you to bring together your online publications, applications like
Seesmic, created by the Frenchman Loïc Le Meur, and Tweetdeck are used
to bring together your Twitter and Facebook accounts in a single place
and to create filters to organize your multiple contents. But the
service likely to bring them all together and supplant them all could
also come from a Web veteran. Google has promised the launch of Google
Wave by the end of the year, a conversation tool that can be enriched
with documents, to allow \"real-time collaboration\". This interface,
accessible from an Internet browser as well as from a mobile, developed
in open source - therefore likely to be quickly improved and enriched by
the community - will allow you to converse live with your contacts as in
a classic instant messenger, to easily insert documents such as photos
or maps, or even various applications, such as a chess game for example,
to play live. These conversations, visible continuously by the user, can
also be published on Internet sites, thus bypassing publication
platforms. One hundred thousand privileged users will be able to test
Google Wave from September 30, and determine if it will be the new
killer app of Web 2.0.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1186

What is a knitting conference doing in the middle of a hacker
convention? The scene is set in December 2007, in Berlin, on the
occasion of the annual meeting of the Chaos Computer Club, one of the
most influential hacker organizations (1). In front of a virile audience
of programmers, Rose White, a plump sociology student, weaves links
between knitting and computer science, demonstrating how the
contemporary practice of knitting is close to open source programming.
Alienation. Before the 1960s, knitting was largely confiscated by the
industry that marketed and controlled patterns via specialized
publications. These instructions intended for housewives did not
indicate the quantity of yarn necessary to make a sweater, but the
number of balls of their brand. \"If you use our yarn and needles and do
exactly as we tell you, you\'ll get the sweater in the magazine,\" says
Rose White, who believes the knitting industry has alienated thousands
of users from their expertise. \"It\'s like comparing Linux to Windows,
Linux is a \'folk culture\' that thrives on shared knowledge among its
users. Windows is a proprietary culture, it gives people very powerful
machines but takes that power away from them by forcing them to do as
they\'re told.\" In the United States, the Linus Torvalds (creator of
Linux) of knitting is Elizabeth Zimmerman, a \"geek before her time\"
who revolutionized the art of knitting in the 1960s by making it \"open
source\" again. The woman who wielded needles in all situations,
including astride the back of her husband\'s motorcycle, published books
with generic patterns that did not require a particular brand of yarn
and were not under copyright. Her motto was \"Knit with confidence and
hope, through all crises.\" Her goal: to give power back to knitters by
allowing them to modify patterns, to improvise from a model. Guerrilla
warfare. At the same time, feminists were throwing balls of yarn in the
trash. They considered them a tool of patriarchy to keep women at home.
It was not until the beginning of the 21st century that knitting made a
surprising comeback. Grandma\'s hobby became trendy. The Internet has
largely contributed to this revival, via blogs, social networks like
Ravelry (2) or community sites like KnitML (3) which attempts to define
a universal standard for describing patterns. Enthusiasts show their
work there, find advice, and share their knowledge. Those who thought
that the horizon was limited to garter stitch discovered the
extraordinary labyrinth patterns of Debbie New or the hexagonal ones,
inspired by the biological life of Norah Gaughan. Some people take DIY
to the extreme, going so far as to spin their own wool from their dog\'s
hair. In fact, people no longer knit exclusively to dress themselves but
to express themselves, what Rose calls Guerrilla Knitting. Artistic
collectives like the Texans Knitta Please (4), pioneers of wool graffiti
who wrap city poles in colorful scarves, or the Wool Warriors of Knit
the City, who decorate London\'s telephone booths. Another game of
knitwear, a community makes red mittens for the statue of Lenin in
Seattle or socks for the bronze horses in Central Park. The artist Dave
Cole has a giant American flag knitted by two cranes handling wooden
poles in the courtyard of Mass Moca. Thousands of anonymous people give
free rein to their imagination, posting their creations on the Web, like
this knitted digestive system, a real anatomy lesson or this uterus in
candy pink wool. Some of these creations are offered for sale, such as
these adorable cephalopods by Hansigurumi, which can be purchased via
online shopping sites such as Etsy (5) or Folksy. These platforms, which
allow artisans to sell their handmade creations (clothing, jewelry,
etc.), are experiencing a real boom. In 2008, sales of goods on Etsy
brought in \$88 million, compared to \$26 million in 2007. More than
200,000 sellers have their own small shops and more than two million
customers are registered. Customization. A craze that reflects a certain
weariness for mass-produced products, cast in the same mold. If the 90s
were the years of brands brandished in big letters on the chest, today,
people are looking to differentiate themselves by wearing something
original, unique, estimates Clive Thompson in a column for Wired.
\"Digital culture has always been about customization and individuality:
we blog our thoughts, we put our lives in photos on Flickr. After years
of shaping the digital world to fit our style, it\'s no wonder we want
to do the same in the physical world.\" According to Thompson, thanks to
this micromanufacturing revolution, the objects around us will become
increasingly personalized. This service already exists at Etsy or
Ponoko: the customer describes what he wants (a sweater, a bag, a
table), says how much he is willing to pay and artisans can offer to
make it for him\... (1)
http://events.ccc.de/congress/2007/Fahrplan/events/2358.en.html (2)
www.ravelry.com (3) www.knitml.com (4) www.knittaplease.com (5)
www.etsy.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1187

A small arrow painted on the asphalt signals the entrance to the Hacker
Space festival (1), on the edge of the RER line, in the nauseating fumes
of the chimneys of the Sanofi Aventis pharmaceutical complex in
Vitry-sur-Seine. The unfriendly environment does not seem to undermine
the enthusiasm that reigns in the cellar at 6 bis, an artistic wasteland
in a disused railway depot, which houses the first French hackerspace,
the /tmp/lab (2). In this buzzing public workshop for creating
technologies and research, people handle soldering irons, modify
electronic circuits, program, but also learn how to make a solar-powered
oven, a wind-powered electricity generator, soaps and sodas or even
cultivate their own bacteria to obtain kefir \"Ensemble\". The hundred
or so participants, artists, coders, activists, came from a dozen
European countries to share their know-how during this second edition
which took place at the end of June. A hacker festival, in the broad
sense of the term, which goes beyond a simple gathering of computer
whizzes. \"For many, hacking is the illegal intrusion into a machine.
That\'s very reductive. It\'s more of a creative, uninhibited and
demystified use of technology,\" its organizer Philippe Langlois, an
expert in computer security, is keen to point out. \"In all areas, we
try to do things with our own means, without depending on a big company.
It\'s a bit like open source, if something is defective, we find a way
to fix it. Together, we are able to improve it.\" Do it yourself (DIY),
but with others. Hackerspaces, which are flourishing all over the world
(there are more than a hundred of them), are temples of resourcefulness,
committed to access and reappropriation of technological tools, open
source activists, fighting against proprietary knowledge. Recycling. In
the basement, Alexandre Korber, a web designer, is assembling a 3D
printer, a device that can build a three-dimensional plastic object
based on a digital model and from molten plastic threads. \"Usually,
these rapid prototyping machines are reserved for high-tech industries
and are very expensive,\" explains Alexandre, \"we wrongly think that
this type of technology is inaccessible.\" Alexandre is a follower of
the RepRap (Replicating rapid prototyper) movement (3) initiated in
Bath, Great Britain by Adrian Bowyer, an idealistic academic who wants
to give access to this technology, aimed at creating a self-replicating
machine, to the general public, whose slogan is \"wealth without
money.\" He brings together, around the open source project, an active
community of people interested in robotics, artists, and programmers.
Seduced by this possibility of \"realizing digital forms\", Alexandre
built his own with salvaged materials (motors from old inkjet printers,
an old PC power supply), a bit of electronics to drive the motor and a
spool of plastic wire bought in a DIY store. \"For less than 300 euros,
you can make a machine that can already make trinkets out of raw
plastic, cups, sandals. The ultimate goal is to obtain a machine capable
of reproducing itself entirely\", explains Alexandre, who believes that
this is a first step towards \"a small plastic craft\". The DIY
movement, which has been growing for two years, has taken off beyond the
hacker community that saw its birth. In these times of recession, DIY is
a way to reduce costs and offer alternatives to mass production.
Providing technologies that allow \"manufacturing almost everything\" on
site is also the goal of Fab labs (fabrication workshops), a program
initiated by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), whose goal
is to support innovative projects in the Third World to transform them
into functional prototypes. For example, there are some in India,
specializing in the manufacture of 3D scanners and printers for local
crafts. Draft. Another international network is that of Brico labs (4),
workshops that are deployed around the world to introduce participants
to free technologies. Like the Bricophone project, led by Jean-Noël
Montagné, which aims to create a very low-cost mobile phone, independent
of private operators, or the open-source washing machine (5), to relieve
most women in the world who wash their clothes by hand. A first low-tech
draft powered by a solar panel was developed as part of a workshop with
students from the Aix-en-Provence art school, using recycled materials
(bicycle wheel, bamboo and an electric motor from an old photocopier).
Presented at the Lift conference in Marseille, entitled \"Future: do it
yourself!\", the washing machine could be assembled quite easily in
developing countries. Unlike in our countries, DIY is not a lifestyle
choice but a necessity and hacking is second nature. This is
demonstrated by the incredible ingenuity of the inventions listed on the
Afrigadget blog (6), from the sheet metal helicopter to the oven made
from a video distributor. Ghana even hosted the first African Maker
Faire (7) from August 14 to 16, to celebrate and draw inspiration from
these everyday DIY enthusiasts. (1) www.hackerspace.net (2)
www.tmplab.org (3) http://reprap.org (4) http://bricolabs.net (5)
www.oswash.org/ (6) www.afrigadget.com (7) makerfaireafrica.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1188

Tomorrow, opensource knitting

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1189

Washington - The world\'s number one mobile phone maker, Finland\'s
Nokia, announced yesterday that it had entered into a partnership with
the American IT group Microsoft, allowing it to equip its devices with
Office office software. \"Under the terms of their agreement, the two
groups will begin immediately to collaborate on the design, development
and marketing of mobile phone IT solutions,\" Nokia and Microsoft said
in a joint statement. Microsoft\'s professional applications in the
areas of e-mail, intranet and management (Microsoft Office Communicator
Mobile suite), then the consumer office software of the Office range,
will be integrated into Nokia\'s Symbian operating system. \"Both
Microsoft and Nokia have a rare combination of experience and
understanding of consumers, and they will use these strengths to develop
a series of new tools for users of future Nokia phones,\" added the
statement. This partnership will allow Microsoft to increase its
presence in the mobile phone sector, at a time when it is fiercely
rivaled by Nokia in the field of mobile phone operating systems. This
agreement comes at a time when Microsoft is seeing its Office range
(word processing, spreadsheets, etc.), the new generation of which is
due to be launched in the first half of 2010, facing strong competition
from free software or online applications offered free of charge by the
internet giant Google. For its part, Nokia is facing, in the
multifunction telephone market, the success of the BlackBerry from the
Canadian RIM and the iPhone from the American Apple, but also the
arrival of devices running the Android operating software developed by
Google.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1190

Because of the flexibility it offers, distance learning continues to
gain popularity in Quebec. According to the Comité de liaison
interordres en formation à distance (CLIFAD), between 1995 and 2008, the
growth in enrolment at the three levels of education can be summed up as
a gain of 252% for secondary schools, 44% for college and 85% for
university. \"Our programs that are currently generating the most
interest are in the field of human resources management and
administration,\" said Denis Gilbert, press relations officer at Téluq.
The institution is constantly creating new courses in line with current
events. For example, the Ethics and Religious Culture course was
recently created for teachers who must teach the new course to
elementary and secondary students. HEC is tempted Even HEC Montréal is
being seduced by distance learning with a hybrid pilot project that will
involve a few certificate courses for adult clients. \"Students will
sometimes have to go to class, so they will have interaction with the
professor and other students. However, part of the training will be
given online, which will provide great flexibility for this student
clientele who works full time and often has a family,\" explained Ruth
Dupré, Program Director at HEC Montréal. If the results of the pilot
project are satisfactory, the hybrid formula could become much more
widespread in the years to come at HEC Montréal. College is not left
out. Several institutions are offering more and more online courses, as
is the case at Cégep André-Laurendeau. At Cégep@distance, the big new
feature this fall will undoubtedly be the use of the social software
Osmose - a free software similar to Facebook - for a few courses, as
part of a pilot project. \"The use of this software has real educational
aims since it will make it easier to carry out team work and have access
to one\'s tutor. The goal is also to break the isolation, a common
problem experienced by distance students,\" emphasized Martine
Chomienne, educational advisor, research and development, at
cégep@distance. If all goes as planned, the use of Osmose should soon be
extended to all courses offered by cégep@distance.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1191

Code of ethics, good governance and transparency have opened the
municipal elections. Rightly so! Each week brings its share of scandals
that further erode citizens\' trust in their institutions. The comments
are numerous, but they only target one person: the elected official. Is
there only one culprit? However, the laws already strictly regulate the
actions of our elected officials. By the admission of specialists in
these matters, the remedies recently proposed are only intended to
reassure citizens. However, a quick overview of the latest scandals
(Housing Office, Montreal IT department, awarding of questionable
contracts, etc.) seems to show that the involvement of elected officials
is rare or secondary. In most cases, the slip-ups are rather the work of
executives and senior civil servants. However, for not having been able
to effectively control municipal civil servants, the elected official,
alone facing the media and his voters, receives all the blame. But did
he really have the means to act? What has been new in the last 20 years
that makes codes, laws and ethics committees ineffective and makes the
position of the people\'s representatives so fragile? What is new is
that a civil servant, in 2009, has at his desk, through the computer and
the underlying information systems, a colossal power of calculation and
information processing. This new power allows him to build files of
extraordinary complexity and refinement. It allows him to be very
efficient for better or\... for worse. Faced with this new power, the
citizen and his representative remain helpless to carry out their
control mandate. What individual is able to grasp, within the two hours
of a board of directors or a municipal council, the complexity of these
files and the mass of information to be processed with only his notebook
and pen as tools? Accessible to all To address the new problems linked
to the growing technological power of administrations, the tools of
democratic control and counter-power will have to be technological.
Rather than further framing and limiting the power of elected officials,
it is by strengthening them and providing them with the appropriate
tools that we will be able to cure this cancer that is undermining our
society. The information systems of public bodies must be accessible to
all: transparent with regard to data, but also transparent with regard
to their processing. By making the processing of data accessible and
transparent, we make the actors in the decision-making processes
accountable and we guarantee the traceability of all decisions. We
enable and encourage real-time interactions between citizens, elected
officials and the administration. This is where free computing, made up
of open file formats, open and free technologies, as well as proven
collaborative working methods from the Internet, will make a necessary
and decisive contribution to the new challenges of our democratic
societies. Already projects We are very far from a utopian idealism.
Many initiatives in the world are already moving in this direction. A
few weeks ago, the New York State Senate announced to all citizens and
their elected officials full access to the organization\'s information
systems. At the beginning of the summer, the City of Vancouver committed
to becoming an \"open\" city by providing all of its data in free
formats and by publishing all of its applications under a free license.
Toronto is preparing to move in the same direction. The future elected
officials of Quebec municipalities will have to renew a pact of trust
with the population. This pact will have to be nourished by new
practices and new tools allowing ordinary citizens to participate in the
management of the city. More than simple tools, free software and
collaborative working methods of the Internet carry within themselves
the values of sharing, transparency and efficiency that will guarantee
compliance with this new pact. Cyrille Béraud: President of the
Collective Appropriation of Free Computing (FACIL)

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1192

In a rapidly changing IT environment, Microsoft, whose turnover and
profits declined in 2008 - a first! - is forced to move. On Friday, the
software giant had to make a major concession in Brussels, regarding its
Explorer browser. A few days earlier, it had \"donated\" to the Linux
community the source code of 20,000 lines concerning three device
managers. A brutal change of direction for a company whose boss, Steve
Ballmer, recently attacked the world of free software, referring to this
\"anti-capitalist cancer\". Interview with Alexandre Zapolsky, CEO of
the software publisher Linagora, a major player in free software. Is
this really a turning point? This is not the first time that Microsoft
has shown signs of openness towards the free software community\... The
event is that they have chosen a GPL license, a completely free license,
the most commonly used in free software. This gesture, more forced than
chosen, shows to what extent the open source market, or open code, has
become mature. So essential that the company that fought it for so many
years is now using it as an element of conquest! Where Microsoft has
been overtaken by its competitors, as in the virtualization market, it
no longer hesitates to adopt a \"disruptive\" model of distribution of
its innovation, totally foreign to its culture. Who would have believed
it just a few years ago? How would you define this \"disruptive\" model
of free software and how does it threaten Microsoft? Until a few years
ago, when we developed an innovation, we did everything to protect our
intellectual property and our secrets. Microsoft has always defended the
idea that this model, because of its simplicity and immediate
profitability - I sell a license, I get my royalties - was the only one
capable of guaranteeing investments and therefore innovation. By
choosing to share their secrets to gain other, indirect advantages
elsewhere, Microsoft\'s leaders demonstrate that this argument no longer
makes sense. It is becoming more interesting, even for Microsoft, to
share its secrets rather than to keep them to itself! But what matters
above all, isn\'t it the company\'s position on its various markets? Of
course, when you are a rentier, as Microsoft is in Windows and PCs, you
frankly have no interest in competition. But when you are a challenger,
as in this virtualization sector where Microsoft\'s rival, VMware, holds
an overwhelming market share of 89%, it is in your best interest for the
competition to be as open as possible. The position of an actor on a
market counts much more than its preference for this or that model;
realism is what counts. Free software currently represents barely a
tenth of the global IT market. Aren\'t we heading towards a radical
change in the months and years to come? That is the whole question.
Microsoft remains the best positioned today to resist the growing
influence of free software, with its two highly profitable product
lines: Windows for the operating system and the Office suite for office
automation. Today, these two activities can finance all of its
investments and authorize research and development spending among the
highest in the world. They are certainly starting to be shaken up by
Google and free software - which is still in its infancy - but this will
take time. And what does this mean? Microsoft\'s openness to open source
will continue but on more secondary activities, on which the company
grants itself great freedom of action. Like virtualization. On these new
markets, Microsoft must show its credentials. But if the company
converts to free software in this area, one can legitimately ask why it
does not do so elsewhere? Increasingly, the market will demand
accountability from Microsoft and the company will have to manage the
danger of free software spreading to its various activities. The famous
cancer that Microsoft CEO Steve Ballmer spoke of is now beginning to
spread inside the patient\'s own body, and its progression will be
increasingly difficult to control.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1193

\- Its name makes you dream: a \"virtual inventory room\" should be
opened on the Web in three years. The wealth of documents as varied as
the Merovingian papyri of the 7th century, the notes of the General
Intelligence Service or the files of the Legion of Honor could be
accessible online. \"Our information system will allow them to know what
exists here,\" explains Isabelle Neuschwander. All the inventories, that
is to say the descriptions, codes and information on the documents, will
be available for consultation as well as a large number of old
documents. Two companies won the call for tenders launched at the end of
2007 to build this world first worth 12 million euros. Logica, an IT
services company, has joined forces with Klee Group, a publisher of
software for physical and electronic archives. The National Archives
wanted to use open source software and pushed Klee Group to open the
source code of its software called Spark Archives to the administration
to enable the creation of custom applications. \"The virtual inventory
room should offer the same services as the physical reading room,\"
explains Stéphane Batiot, from Logica, who supervised the call for
tenders. It is in these rooms, similar to those in large libraries, that
\"readers\" reconstruct their family tree or advance research work. By
early 2013, 7 million digital documents will be available for
consultation.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1194

Google challenges Microsoft by launching an operating system. To control
the Internet, the Californian giant only needs to manufacture computers.
This is one of the last weapons that Google still lacks to hope to one
day completely dominate the Internet. The American group announced on
its blog on Tuesday, July 7, that it was working on an operating system
for computers, a program that will ensure the link between the machine
(its processor, its memory, etc.) and the applications (word processing,
video games, etc.). Chrome OS - that\'s its name - will be based on
\"open source\" technologies (that external developers can modify as
they wish). Google promises that it will allow faster access to PC
applications. It will initially be intended for \"netbooks\", these
portable computers costing less than \$500 designed for checking emails
and surfing, and whose sales have exploded in recent months. Chrome OS
should be available in the second half of 2010. This announcement is a
declaration of war on Microsoft: Google is attacking its core business,
and what\'s more with free software, while Microsoft\'s operating
systems are paid. Google and Microsoft are already competing on several
fronts: office software, search engines and operating systems (\"OS\")
for mobile phones. But Microsoft, the world\'s leading software
publisher (60.4 billion dollars in revenue for the 2008 fiscal year, or
43.2 billion euros, and 17.7 billion dollars in profits), derives its
power from its arch-dominant position on the PC OS market, with the
Windows range (which equips 9 out of 10 computers in the world). Sergey
Brin, Larry Page and Eric Schmidt, the leaders of Google, seem to have a
very clear vision of the goal they want to achieve with their group.
\"Since its beginnings, Google has bet on maximizing its audience by
offering free services, then by promoting this audience to advertisers.
All its attempts at diversification can be measured by this yardstick,\"
explains Laurent Geffroy, from the Greenwich Consulting firm. Google
began to implement this strategy with its search engine. To this day,
this tool is still the most popular on the Web (840 million unique
visitors in May, according to the Comscore institute), despite the
attempts of the competition (the latest being the launch of \"Bing\",
Microsoft\'s search engine). With its associated advertising offer,
sponsored links, Google has succeeded in transforming its engine into a
real money-printing machine. The group (21.8 billion dollars in turnover
in 2008 and 4.2 billion dollars in profit), captures approximately 40%
of the total online spending of advertisers. Still with the aim of
maximizing its audience, the Californian group has launched
communication tools (Gmail, Google Talk), office software (Google Docs)
and the Chrome web browser. \"The engine allows you to find information
on the web. The browser allows you to access the Internet and the OS
runs the browser. It is therefore logical that after the engine and the
browser, Google is now launching its OS,\" analyzes Mr. Geffroy. But
these attempts are not all successes. Of course, Gmail has managed to
break through, with 146 million unique visitors in May, according to
Comscore (compared to 343 million for Microsoft Hotmail). Android, the
OS for mobile phones, already equips around twenty terminals. But Google
is struggling to sell the audience of YouTube, its video sharing site.
Google Docs is far from having dethroned Microsoft\'s Office suite. The
same goes for Google Talk, the instant messaging service, which only had
8.3 million unique visitors in May (Comscore), compared to 323 million
for Microsoft\'s MSN Messenger. As for the Chrome browser, it only has a
market share of 1.8%, compared to 65.5% for Microsoft\'s Internet
Explorer, and 22.5% for Firefox, the free software from the Mozilla
Foundation. Arrival of Windows 7 As for PC OSes, Microsoft is far from
being on its knees yet. In the \"netbook\" segment, the Seattle group
has managed to regain the advantage over Linux freeware, which - for
cost reasons - equipped most of the first machines launched on the
market. Microsoft could further consolidate its dominance over all PCs
with Windows 7, the new version of its OS, scheduled for October 22,
which has been very well received by professionals. \"It will take time
for Google to develop an OS that works and is compatible with other
hardware on the market,\" predicts Bruno Lakehal of Gartner. What will
be the next step for Google, whose ambition seems excessive?
Manufacturing machines? \"That\'s logical. But I don\'t believe it. Only
Apple, in the IT sector, has really managed to have a foot in both
professions,\" believes Mr. Geffroy.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1195

This is one of the last weapons that Google still lacked to hope to one
day completely dominate the Internet. The American group announced on
its blog on Tuesday, July 7, that it was working on an operating system
for computers, a program that ensures the link between the machine (its
processor, its memory, etc.) and the applications (word processing,
video games, etc.). Chrome OS - that\'s its name - will be based on
\"open source\" technologies (external developers will be able to modify
it as they wish). Google promises that it will allow faster access to PC
applications. It will initially be intended for \"netbooks\", these
portable computers costing less than \$500 designed for checking emails
and surfing, whose sales have exploded in recent months. Chrome OS
should be available in the second half of 2010. This announcement is a
declaration of war on Microsoft: Google is attacking its core business.
What\'s more, with free software, while Microsoft\'s operating systems
are paid for. Google and Microsoft are already competing in several
areas: office software, search engines and operating systems (\"OS\")
for mobile phones. But Microsoft, the world\'s leading software
publisher (60.4 billion dollars in revenue for the 2008 fiscal year, or
43.2 billion euros, and 17.7 billion dollars in profits), derives its
power from its arch-dominant position in the PC OS market, with the
Windows range (which equips 9 out of 10 computers in the world). Sergey
Brin, Larry Page and Eric Schmidt, the leaders of Google, seem to have a
very clear vision of where they want to take their group. \"Since its
beginnings, Google has bet on maximizing the audience by offering free
services, then by promoting this audience to advertisers. All its
attempts at diversification can be read in this light,\" according to
Laurent Geffroy, from the Greenwich Consulting firm. Google began to
implement this strategy with its search engine. To this day, this tool
is still the most popular on the Web (840 million unique visitors in
May, according to the Comscore institute), despite competing attempts
(the latest being the launch of \"Bing\", Microsoft\'s search engine).
With its associated advertising offer, sponsored links, Google has
succeeded in transforming its engine into a \"cash machine\". The group
(21.8 billion dollars in turnover in 2008 and 4.2 billion dollars in
profit), captures approximately 40% of the total online spending of
advertisers. Still with the aim of maximizing its audience, the
Californian group has launched communication tools (Gmail, Google Talk),
office software (Google Docs) and the Chrome Web browser. \"The engine
allows you to find information on the Web. The browser allows you to
access the Internet and the OS runs the browser. It is therefore logical
that after the engine and the browser, Google is now releasing its OS,\"
analyses Mr. Geffroy. But these attempts are not all successes.
Certainly, Gmail managed to break through with 146 million unique
visitors in May according to Comscore (compared to 343 million for
Microsoft Hotmail). Android, the OS for mobile phones, already equips
about twenty terminals. But Google is struggling to sell the audience of
Youtube, its video sharing site. Google Docs is far from having
dethroned Microsoft\'s Office suite. The same goes for Google Talk, the
instant messaging service, which only had 8.3 million unique visitors in
May (Comscore), compared to 323 million for MSN Messenger, from
Microsoft. As for the Chrome browser, it only has a market share of
1.8%, compared to 65.5% for Internet Explorer, from Microsoft, and 22.5%
for Firefox, the free software from the Mozilla Foundation. ARRIVAL OF
WINDOWS 7 As for PC OS, Microsoft is far from being on its knees yet. In
the \"netbook\" segment, the Seattle group has managed to regain the
advantage over free and open source Linux software, which - for cost
reasons - equipped most of the first machines launched on the market.
Microsoft could further consolidate its dominance over all PCs with
Windows 7, the new version of its OS, scheduled for October 22, which
has been very well received by professionals. \"It will take time for
Google to develop an OS that works and is compatible with other hardware
on the market,\" predicts Bruno Lakehal, from Gartner. What will be the
next step for Google, whose ambition seems excessive? Machine
manufacturing? \"That\'s logical. But I don\'t believe it. Only Apple,
in the IT sector, has really managed to have a foot in both
professions,\" believes Mr. Geffroy.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1196

The future Chrome OS operating system will be based on Linux, free
software (i.e. usable, modifiable, duplicable and distributable without
constraint) created by Linus Torvalds in 1991, and intended for PCs.
While some netbooks run on Linux, more than 90% are equipped with
Windows XP. Chrome OS is not the only one to bet on open source (a
designation that includes free software, but broader). The Moblin
project designed by Intel was also, and the French Tariq Krim, creator
of Netvibes, is preparing to launch Jolicloud (in reference to \"cloud
computing\", the theory of the dematerialization of services, now
entrusted to the network, such as online storage). Jolicloud is an
operating system based on Linux whose operation is designed for the
Internet, with its online applications and its interface inspired by
that of the iPhone.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1197

There is no limit to Google\'s ambitions. The search giant announced
yesterday that it plans to create its own operating system for
mini-laptops, thus triggering an almost philosophical war against
Microsoft and its ubiquitous Windows. The confrontation between the two
giants, long anticipated for anyone interested in the rumors that have
been circulating on the Web for months, will pit two radically different
conceptions of what computing should be in the Internet age against each
other. Google\'s new operating system, unlike Windows and Apple\'s Mac
OS-X, will run entirely within the computer\'s Internet browser. In
other words, no more software to install: under Google Chrome OS
(that\'s the provisional name that Google has given its project),
software will be loaded like web pages. A Linux kernel, developed with
the help of the open source community, will bridge the gap between this
web-based software and the hardware that makes up the computer. \"The
user interface will be minimal, so as not to overload your environment
and leave room for what matters most today: the Internet experience,\"
the company wrote on its blog yesterday. Google, which already offers,
with Gmail and Google Docs, a vast suite of free software running
entirely in the browser, is initially targeting the netbook market with
its new operating system. The company plans to install Google Chrome OS
for free on several of these ultraportable computers starting in the
second half of 2010. This fast-growing market is currently dominated by
Microsoft, which has managed to impose its old Windows XP operating
system on these devices, which cost between \$300 and \$600, but for
which buyers pay around \$45 for the license. According to the New York
Times, Google is aiming to make its new type of operating system
powerful enough to run on the rest of the PC range. A first salvo \"This
is a first public salvo that Google is sending to Microsoft, in a war
that has been going on behind the scenes for about two years,\" notes
Michel Dagenais, director of the computer engineering department at the
École polytechnique de Montréal. According to him, the idea pushed by
Google that an operating system can \"live\" entirely in a browser could
well please a majority of users. \"What most people want is a system
that starts in 5 or 10 seconds, plays music, manages photos and goes on
the web. That\'s what Google offers, and it meets the needs of 70% of
users,\" he says. Colin Surprenant, principal architect at the Montreal
developer Praized who himself has developed many products according to
this philosophy of software \"living in the browser,\" believes that
Google\'s system will gradually make Windows obsolete. \"There are huge
advantages to such an operating system. For users, they require no
installation and no maintenance. For developers, the model makes work
much easier: it is much easier and faster to develop for the web than in
the classic model, where you have to deal with complex libraries,
drivers and a host of heavy elements to manage.\" \"In my opinion,
Google Chrome OS even has the potential to dislodge Windows, but it will
take a few years,\" believes Mr. Surprenant. Quite a challenge, when you
know that Microsoft alone holds 90% of the operating system market.
Yesterday, on the NASDAQ electronic stock exchange, Google shares gained
US\$5.86, to US\$402.49, while Microsoft lost 3 US cents, to US\$22.56.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1198

The bottom line. Google revealed yesterday that it would launch its own
free and open-source operating system, called Chrome OS, by 2010. The
context. The world\'s number one search engine is taking on Microsoft
head-on, the world\'s leading software company, whose Windows operating
system powers 90% of the world\'s computers. The stakes. The
announcement is just another escalation in the war between the two
giants, as Google confirms its aggressive strategy of all-out
development.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1199

On Tuesday evening, the number 1 search engine announced, to everyone\'s
surprise - or almost - the launch in 2010 of Chrome OS. This operating
system will be free and initially intended for netbooks, these low-cost
mini-portables whose sales have exploded in the last two years. Chrome
is above all the name of the web browser offered by Google in September,
a direct competitor to Internet Explorer and Firefox. With 30 million
active users worldwide, according to Google, Chrome\'s market share is
around 3%. \"Not bad for a browser launched less than a year ago,\" said
Michael Arrington, founder of the specialist site Techcrunch, yesterday,
who does not mince his words in describing this announcement: \"Google
is dropping an atomic bomb on Microsoft.\" Dominant position. The
computer operating system market is often summed up, a little hastily,
as the eternal battle between Microsoft and Apple, respectively behind
Windows and Mac OS. This is to make light of open source solutions like
Linux, but the figures tend to justify such a shortcut: 90% of computers
in the world actually run on a version of Windows (XP and Vista, for the
vast majority), 5% on Mac OS, the rest being made up of machines based
on Linux and other derivatives. You had to be called Google to rub
shoulders with this domain marked by the hegemony of Microsoft,
regularly tackled for its dominant position and its tied sales policy so
decried by consumer associations. On the official Google blog, Chrome OS
is presented as \"an attempt to rethink what operating systems should
be\". What do we know for the moment about this new operating system
that is competing with Windows on its own turf? Not much, except that it
will be centered around the Web and online-only applications, open
source (see box). Announced as \"fast, simple and secure\" by Google,
Chrome OS will be based on the Linux architecture, that is to say
modifiable by any motivated volunteer who is competent enough in
computer tinkering. Google plays it modest by assuring that it \"needs
them to accomplish this vision\". Competitor Microsoft is implicitly
targeted when Google declares that \"current operating systems were
created at a time when the Internet did not exist\". Or again when it
talks about the long hours spent \"configuring machines to install new
hardware, taking care of constant software updates\". Gazelle. The date
of the announcement was apparently not chosen at random. Next week,
Microsoft will hold its Worldwide Partner Conference in New Orleans, a
big gathering where new information on its future Windows 7 will be
revealed. This operating system, successor to the controversial Vista,
will be released in October. A rumor is also circulating about the
announcement of a project in development in Microsoft\'s research
laboratories. This is a brand new web browser, with functions similar to
those of an operating system. Its name: Gazelle. We would then better
understand Google\'s surprise announcement to praise its still distant
project. Welcome to the jungle of the Net.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1200

90% of computers are equipped with Windows, Microsoft\'s operating
system. 5% run on Mac OS (Apple), the rest being open source systems
such as Linux.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1201

A long grey building on a quiet street in the centre of Vienna, near the
city hall. The windows of the mezzanine are permanently lit, because
Metalab, the main hacker space in the Austrian capital, is open day and
night. The tone is set as soon as you enter this club of libertarian
computer scientists: the telephone box looks very ordinary, but it
allows you to make free calls around the world, because it is connected
to a computer server that transmits communications via the Internet.
Created in 2006, Metalab now has around a hundred members, who pay a
subscription of 40 euros per month to cover rent and technical costs.
Since May 2009, it has been run by Christian Benke, a 28-year-old
computer scientist, elected by his peers for a year: \"I have little
power,\" he explains with a smile, \"just accounting and legal
responsibilities. Here, everyone does what they want.\" » The main room,
decorated with Internet-controlled light effects, serves as a collective
work room and conference room when an outside expert comes to give a
presentation. This evening, an Englishman living in Fontainebleau, who
came from France by bike, explains a vast project to unify and secure
all the social networks existing on the Net. In a corner, Mika, a
computer security consultant, has come to help a young hacker unlock an
iPhone to install software not approved by Apple: free telephony via the
Internet to bypass the GSM operator, and encryption of conversations to
prevent any interception. At the end of the corridor, the small library
is occupied by two very noisy students, who are making a war game for
mobiles. The Metalab also has an electronic music studio and an arcade
games room: the console was entirely built here, and all the games were
downloaded for free. Another large room houses the workshop, which is
packed to the brim: workbenches, toolboxes, spare parts in bulk, gutted
computers\... Here, hackers come to build their own electronic machines.
Astera, recognizable from afar thanks to her multi-colored hair,
piercings and nine tattoos, has undertaken to house a voice-controlled
music server inside a celluloid mannequin. Further on, Marius, a burly
man dressed all in black, is assembling a \"3D printer\", a bulky device
used to make objects from molten plastic threads. Marius is a follower
of the \"RepRap\" (replicating rapid prototyper) movement, initiated in
Great Britain and New York: \"Our ultimate goal is to design a machine
capable of completely self-reproducing.\" In the short term, the RepRaps
want to give the general public the means to manufacture all sorts of
plastic objects in an artisanal way, thus breaking the monopoly of large
industry. In addition to their ultra-hip projects, young hackers are
maintaining the great tradition established by their elders. They
tirelessly search for security flaws in Internet software and servers,
and publish their findings to force manufacturers to fix them. In
addition, they participate in the creation of systems that allow people
to use the Internet while remaining anonymous or invisible. Their goal
is to preserve freedom of expression and to protect Internet users from
Internet scammers, but also from marketing companies and certain police
services, which monitor the network and harvest masses of personal data.
They remain faithful to the basic philosophy of the movement: teamwork,
knowledge sharing, free and open software. Many lead a double life,
computer scientists during the day in a company, hacker-activists at
night and on weekends. Some have already created their start-ups: for
them, the status of private entrepreneur is not in contradiction with
that of hacker-activist, on the contrary, since it makes them
independent. The Metalab has also become the anchor point for several
techno-political groups, which do not have their own premises. This is
where the activists of the association FunkFeuer (\"beacon\") meet every
week, who have undertaken to build a mega-Wi-Fi network in the center of
Vienna, free, encrypted and self-managed. Places similar to the Metalab
are appearing on all continents. Until the early 2000s, hackers were
lone wolves, who communicated via the Internet and met from time to
time, at conferences and festivals. Clubs with their own premises were
rare, concentrated in a few university towns in the United States and in
Germany, with the famous Chaos Computer Club. But the new generation,
more convivial, has rediscovered the pleasure of living in a tribe, and
of working together around the same table. The founders of the Metalab
opened a website, called Hackerspaces.org, which has established itself
as the virtual meeting point of the movement on a global scale.
According to Astera, which helps manage the site, there are now nearly
200 active hacker spaces in around fifty countries, and around 170 in
the process of being set up or planned. Some hackers have become nomads.
They go on long tours to visit foreign hacker spaces and set up joint
projects. Paul Böhm, 26, the charismatic founder of Metalab in Vienna,
has been in San Francisco for a few months. There, he frequents the
local hacker space, Noisebridge, which is very similar to Metalab.
Astera, who has just left her job after twelve years in a Viennese
advertising agency, has already participated in sixteen events since the
beginning of the year, in Europe and the United States. At the beginning
of this summer, she was in Paris, to participate in the Hacker Festival
organized by tmp/lab (temporary lab). The first Parisian hacker space,
tmp/lab was launched in late 2007 by a group of friends gathered around
Philippe Langlois, 34, a computer security expert and entrepreneur who
has lived in California. It is not really in Paris, but 9 km to the
south, in the industrial zone of Vitry-sur-Seine, in the basement of a
disused railway depot, between the railway tracks and the A86 motorway,
a chemical plant and a truck wash station. The building belongs to
Réseau Ferré de France, which agreed to lend a bit of the basement free
of charge. In the basement, the equipment is basic and the decor leaves
something to be desired, but there is a kitchen and a bedroom, and the
workspace is vast. The thirty or so hackers who frequent it feel good
there, even if some dream of a place in Paris. The festival, which
lasted four days, welcomed a good hundred participants, from a dozen
European countries, plus a few Americans. The members of tmp/lab had
invaded the neighboring cellars to set up a temporary workshop and a
meeting room. The days were studious, because the conferences and
demonstrations were cutting-edge, but after the (vegetarian) dinner, the
party lasted until dawn. The hackers had also come to discuss the future
of the movement and compare their experiences. Some Italians and
Spaniards, very involved in social struggles, have merged with the
squatter movements. The Germans are focusing on technical challenges and
political-legal actions. The Swedes, well established, are helping the
other Nordic countries to create their hacker spaces. The Athenians,
Luxembourgers and Toulousains have not yet found premises, but they are
hopeful. The tmp/lab of Vitry presented several projects. The most
spectacular is undoubtedly that of N., the brilliant creator of the
\"Hadopi router\": \"The expression was invented by bloggers who came up
with the concept. We made it happen.\" The Hadopi law, which establishes
a system of surveillance and repression of Internet users downloading
illegal audio and video files, is of course the number one enemy of
hackers. N., who worked for a while for a router manufacturer, wrote
with some friends a program capable of transforming a PC equipped with
an ordinary Wi-Fi box into an offensive weapon: \"It detects the Wi-Fi
networks in the neighborhood, then starts cracking all their passwords.
As soon as we have the keys, we can create a virtual access point,\"
that is, use the neighbor\'s Internet connection without his knowledge.
To avoid being detected, N.\'s router randomly broadcasts fictitious
machine addresses. If a \"conquered\" router changes its password, the
system automatically switches to another Wi-Fi signal in the
neighborhood - and immediately begins attacking the new password. The
\"Hadopi router\" also allows monitoring of what users of \"cracked\"
networks are doing, but V., who worked on the project with N., denies
any malicious intent: \"We just want to publish our software, and make
everyone understand that the technical data used by Hadopi to accuse
people will not be reliable. Thanks to us, judges will not be able to
say that they were not aware.\" N. is already imagining a more ambitious
strategy: distributing dozens of modified routers in a neighborhood, and
creating an invisible mini-network, superimposed on existing networks.
The new French hacker movement, which had lagged behind its European
neighbors, is booming.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1202

Siren Shields, Hehe\'s exhibition until July 18 at Ars Longa, 67 avenue
Parmentier, 75011 Paris. From Wednesday to Saturday. Info:
www.arslonga.fr \"As a foreigner, what struck me when I moved to Paris
were the police sirens that you hear constantly,\" explains Heiko
Hansen, an artist of German origin who forms the duo Hehe with Helen
Evans. A haunting \"two-tone\" siren, the daily background noise of the
people of the Paris region, that the duo decided to track down with
their Siren Shields device. In recent months, video surveillance boxes
have sprung up on balconies that are triggered only by the sirens\'
songs. Equipped with free software of their own (1) developed with the
help of an IRCAM researcher (whose father is a police officer), the
device analyzes ambient sound in real time and detects the frequencies
of a siren, announcing the imminent arrival of the police. From then on,
the cameras begin to record the ballet of police cars. \"Pin-pon\".
These \"counter-surveillance\" videos are presented at the Ars Longa
gallery in Paris, whose storefront is itself equipped with a box. \"The
pin-pon of the French siren is very close to that of the German
police,\" notes Heiko, recounting that across the Rhine, the police had
tried to adopt the American \"sinusoidal\" siren, but gave up in the
face of the mockery of this strident \"Kojak siren\", an allusion to the
American series from the 70s. Hehe is very interested in this
relationship that the police have with cinema. The artists wanted to use
their device to generate a kind of detective film. \"When the flashing
light comes on and the siren starts to wail, a choreography is set up
around this car which forces its trajectory at high speed through the
city, while everything around it freezes.\" Siren Shields allows this
\"dramatic\" moment to be captured in the city, but also on TV screens.
\"Our software, connected to TNT, also allows us to automatically record
all the sequences where we hear this famous siren.\" More than 200 files
were collected in a single day, fragments of detective series, films, TV
news, but also disconnected extracts, like this classical orchestra
playing these two same notes. In the gallery, whose entrance is blocked
by a giant blinding flashing light, the visitor can mix these different
audiovisual extracts sucked in by the software, and create their own
clip. An opportunity to take the measure of the extreme codification of
the detective film. \"The stakes of the police film are not only
commercial and cultural, they are also political,\" notes Olivier
Philippe, in Representation of the police in French cinema 1965-1992
(2). Humor. \"The imagination undoubtedly contributes to the
effectiveness of the police in reality. \[\...\] The role of
representations of the police can largely contribute to avoiding the use
of force by internalizing the values of order.\" The same could be said
of surveillance cameras. As the theorist Konrad Becker pointed out,
\"security is not only technological, but an internalized way of
thinking. Surveillance cameras do not need to be turned on to work their
magic.\" With humor, Hehe reverses the roles, and gives back control to
the citizen who can in turn monitor those who control us, tracking
police activity and manipulating the images with which he is inundated
daily. As usual, Hehe does not seek so much to denounce as to attract
the critical attention of the public. This is the case of his project
Nuage vert (Libération, June 2) which, by coloring the emissions
escaping from factory chimneys, aims to raise people\'s awareness of the
issue of energy consumption, or waste. Making perceptible what is
not\... is no longer perceptible, because we have ended up getting used
to it. (1) The software can be downloaded from:
http://hehe.org.free.fr/hehe/siren/(2) Editions de l\'Harmattan, 2000.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1203

Dominique Weber teaches philosophy in preparatory classes. He published
Hobbes and the Desire of Madmen in 2007 at the Presses de l\'université
Paris-Sorbonne. In the Esprit dossier, he analyzes piracy in its
political dimension. From pirate radio stations to the Pirate Bay list
in Sweden, how did the pirate become a political figure? It seems to me
that the perception of piracy began to change with the work of the
British historian Christopher Hill and in particular his article
entitled \"Radical Pirates?\", published in 1984. Hill was the first to
place it in the political-religious context of the English revolution of
the 17th century and in particular the virulent contestation of royal
power and the established Church of England by the most radical part of
the Puritan Calvinist movement. This movement had many representatives
in piracy and its ideals deeply influenced it, even if it is not true to
say that English pirates were all religious \"dissidents\" or that all
radicals became pirates. In any case, Hill\'s article opened the way to
a reevaluation of piracy, as evidenced above all in the United States by
the important work of Marcus Rediker (1). They teach us that, much more
than a way of practicing brigandage at sea, piracy is a political
phenomenon, bringing about a real overhaul of social codes concerning
authority, the sharing of wealth, social protection, the refusal of
slavery or even the status of women. In the General History of the Most
Famous Pirates, Daniel Defoe has extraordinary pages to describe
Libertalia, a pirate colony in Madagascar with the air of a republican
utopia. Nevertheless, you write, the \"pirate\" is not a \"partisan\",
because he does not seek to make a revolution. I borrow this distinction
from the philosopher Carl Schmitt. The initial question, for him, was
that of irregular combatants, that is to say, those not belonging to the
regular armies of a sovereign state. Schmitt is interested in
irregularity because the 20th century is confronted with a new way of
waging war: partisan combat, notably according to the theorization made
of it by Lenin and Mao. For Schmitt, the partisan acts in a logic of
absolute hostility because his finality, dictated by revolutionary
imperatives, is to destroy the existing political institution. His goal
is nevertheless to succeed in replacing the latter with another. In this
sense, he remains deeply anchored in territorial realities: he is
\"telluric\". The pirate is also an irregular fighter, with this double
difference in Schmitt\'s eyes that, on the one hand, he expresses a
maritime vision of the world and, on the other hand, that, not claiming
to replace the terrestrial institution, he is only a criminal practicing
plunder. An analysis which, I believe, minimizes the fact that piracy
was also, at certain times, a way of challenging the established order.
Can we, without anachronism, compare the pirate to the new activists -
the alter-globalist, the free software activist - who, they too, refuse
to take power? In any case, we can see that the use of the figure of the
pirate by the alter-globalist movements is entirely claimed. An English
political collective, called \"Do or Die\", published a short text a few
years ago, Bastions pirates. A libertarian history of piracy. The
collapse of Marxism-Leninism left a whole fringe of political activists
orphaned, in search of new theoretical and practical models of protest,
new utopias. The utopias of the classical age, such as that of Thomas
More, proposed what Pierre-François Moreau calls a \"novel of the
State\", that is to say the description of a perfectly rational
functioning of the State. However, the pirate utopia is built against
the State. In economics or on the Internet, the figure of the pirate
brings together in a surprising, even worrying way, the liberal spirit
and the libertarian aspiration, both desiring a liquid,
\"disinstituted\" world, freed from the constraints of \"telluric\"
States. But in a liquid world, who will protect the weakest? Human life
is not natural, it must be instituted and protected. Moreover, Roman
law, which aimed to \"establish life,\" described the pirate as \"the
enemy of the human race.\" (1) See on this subject: Marcus Rediker and
Peter Linebaugh, The Thousand-Headed Hydra: The Hidden History of the
Revolutionary Atlantic, published by Editions Amsterdam in late 2008.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1204

SINGAPORE - LG Electronics Inc. said this week that the mobile phone
market is doing well despite the global crisis and announced plans to
launch three phones this year running Google\'s Android operating
system. Android is an open-source operating system for mobile phones.
U.S. carrier T-Mobile was the first to market last year with the G1, the
first phone running Google Android.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1205

And now, what are we going to do? This question is now agitating
everyone\'s minds, from the center to the far left, and even beyond. For
a week, brains and calculators have been overheating in all political
headquarters. The good results of Europe Ecologie on the evening of June
7 arouse covetousness, speculation and also fantasies of little
arrangements between friends\... In a political game that remains sadly
classic, I admit that the question is not without importance, nor
totally illegitimate. But I prefer, as a precaution, to warn those who
hope to see us give in to the horse-trading of the parties that they are
very likely to be at their expense. For a week, I have been saying and
repeating: Europe Ecologie does not own its voters. If an electoral
property right were to exist, it would obviously be that of citizens
over the parties that represent them, and not the other way around!
Sound evidence that our competitors - and perhaps future partners -
should meditate on. Let\'s be clear: I am not trying to avoid the
question of strategy and possible alliances. I want people to understand
first that our success is not the result of a mood vote, or even a
clever arrangement of our ecological and European convictions. Ideas, no
more than people, do not belong to anyone. They are intended to
circulate freely, to spread and to evolve through contact with others.
Some have already not hesitated to draw on our proposals and many more
will do so in the coming months. Let them know that we will judge their
sincerity by their actions and not by their words. The pollination of
our ideas on Europe will certainly be less obvious, as it is likely to
implode the old matrix on which the institutional organization of powers
in this country is based. We have made strong commitments to transform
Europe and its modes of operation and we have no intention of deviating
from them. Quite the contrary! This partly answers the question of what
we are going to do now. Only partly. Because we would be autistic if we
did not understand that the success of our lists also reflects an
intense desire to see the way of being in politics change and a sudden
hope to see new and closer links invented between society and those who
choose to carry their aspirations within the public space. It is
precisely this way of saying and doing that is the most innovative thing
in the Europe Ecologie gathering. In its composition, its construction,
as in its operation, it manages to embody the spirit of the project of
civilization that we carry: that of a society that refuses to sacrifice
diversity to uniqueness or fragmentation; that of a gathering where the
multiplicity of individual paths produces common values rather than
personal ambitions and, ultimately, that of a project where convictions
are sources of dialogue and exchange with others, without sectarian
drift or dilution of meaning. Politics is a matter of style and method
as much as of ideas. Our philosophy of life reminds us at every moment
that the ends are also in the means. In other words, we cannot act and
carry an ideal without thinking our methods of intervention in full
coherence with our project. Unfortunately, incoherence has become
commonplace in French political life and this is what explains the
relative success of the UMP and the respective failures of the MoDem and
the Socialist Party during these elections. Because, if it is not always
clearly expressed, Sarkozy\'s political project does indeed exist and
can be deciphered in bits and pieces in each of the multiple decisions
with which he floods the country. This project, I affirm, is absurd and
goes against the reality of the world in which we live, but it is
nevertheless coherent in its absurdity even in the way in which the
tenant of the Elysée today embodies power and the
hyper-presidentialization of the regime. In his caricatured
anti-Sarkozysme, Bayrou sacrificed the ideals of his political family by
making the MoDem a \"miniature UMP\" and himself a caricature of the
Sarkozysme he claimed to denounce. For its part, the PS has squandered a
diversity that could have made it rich to become an electoral cartel
without a coherent project and increasingly \"offshore\" with respect to
the aspirations of those who historically built and supported it. It now
resembles a former state enterprise reduced to the rank of a large SME,
equipped with an army of executives now less concerned with talking to
those who could be its creative force than with tearing each other apart
in a presidential competition that, as it stands, remains surreal. So,
to the nagging question of \"what are we going to do\", I answer that we
are going to continue to break the logic of the \"proprietary system\"
that dominates our national political life, both at the global and local
levels, both through Europe and on the occasion of regional elections.
More than ever, we will promote the notion of \"free software\" applied
to politics and society. It is the only serious alternative to the forms
of demo-autocratic powers that are proliferating, on the left as well as
the right, in France as in Europe. Let us be clear: we do not claim to
become a hegemonic force on the left or elsewhere. It is not our culture
and we remain resolutely hostile to genetic mutations. We aim precisely
to strip political life of this hegemonic temptation which, just like
the productivist ideology, has haunted the left and the right for
decades. In politics, as in nature, biodiversity is a wealth and any
attempt to merge ourselves into a sort of large social-democratic party
would be synonymous with impoverishment. We want to spread our ways of
doing and thinking about politics to our competitors and potential
partners. The result of June 7 gives us, I believe, a pivotal role in
the life of this country, in particular between a strong aspiration to
renew and deepen the instruments of democracy and an imperative to
rebuild social justice and regulatory mechanisms around the urgent need
to safeguard the environment and the planet. Since the political forces
of this country have not yet led the Copernican revolution that citizens
demand of them, we have no other coherent outcome today than that of our
political autonomy. For us, the notion of autonomy is not synonymous
with closure or going it alone. Quite the contrary. Our gathering is and
will remain open at the same time as it continues to develop its roots
to make its foliage flourish. The challenge is immense and like the
European challenge: it is to succeed in jointly implementing a dynamic
of enlargement and deepening. In a tight schedule, well before the
regional elections, we have two major meetings with those who would like
to become our partners: a European meeting for the construction of a
broad coalition aimed at preventing the reappointment of José Manuel
Barroso as head of the European Commission; an environmental meeting for
the international mobilisation of citizens, associations and political
parties, so that the Copenhagen summit on climate change truly results
in measures to preserve the future of our planet. We want to prove Edgar
Morin right. It is not simply a question of introducing politics into
ecology, but ecology into politics. We are on the move.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1206

\"I prefer, as a precaution, to warn those who hope to see us give in to
the horse-trading of apparatuses that they are very likely to be
disappointed.\" In a point of view, Daniel Cohn-Bendit, European deputy,
explains his conception of the means of escaping \"the incoherence
(\...) which has become commonplace in French political life\". The
clarification of the leader of Europe Ecologie, whose success was the
major event of the European elections of June 7, targets the Socialist
Party, accused of having \"wasted a diversity that could have made its
wealth, to become an electoral cartel without a coherent project\". The
\"political autonomy\", which Mr. Cohn-Bendit claims, \"is not
synonymous with closure or going it alone\". He advocates the
dissemination of his ideas. Two upcoming \"major events\" could,
according to him, bring into reality \"the notion of \"software\"
applied to politics and society\": the constitution of a \"broad
coalition\" aimed at preventing the reappointment of José Manuel Barroso
as head of the European Commission, and a broad mobilization before the
Copenhagen summit on climate change.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1207

Nearly a hundred young members of the Génération d\'idées group took
part in a spontaneous demonstration yesterday morning in the heart of
downtown Montreal. On the eve of the commemoration of the Normandy
landings of June 6, 1944, dozens of people presented a \"War and Peace\"
scene, referring to the theme of the fourth and final issue of their
magazine. Arranged in two parallel rows, facing each other, they
approached to\... give each other a long hug. A non-profit, independent
and non-partisan organization, Génération d\'idées offers the next
generation a space for thinking and sharing ideas so that they can meet
the challenges that beset Quebec society. \"We wanted to give a voice to
the 25-35 generation, the Passe-Partout generation, because we felt that
we didn\'t find ourselves in the public space much,\" explains Mélanie
Joly, co-founder of Génération d\'idées. \"It\'s an OpenSource project,
a Wikipedia of ideas. People submit their texts, their ideas, whether on
the website or in the magazine,\" she adds. A Générations d\'idées
summit will be held within a year. The group promises to \"come up with
very concrete ideas\" on education and the environment, among other
subjects.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1208

STOCKHOLM - Buoyed by sympathy for the four guys from the Swedish
file-sharing website Pirate Bay, recently sentenced to prison for
\"aiding piracy,\" Sweden\'s Pirate Party could enter the European
Parliament next week. Columnist Marie-Claude Lortie interviewed the
founder of this rebel party in Stockholm, a few days before the end of
the election. Here is an account of an informal meeting. I spot him on
the subway platform, wearing a purple polo shirt with the words
Piratpartiet and a tiny white computer under his arm. It is Rickard
Falkvinge, 37, founder of the Swedish Pirate Party. He chats with
passersby, showing them information on his laptop, which is online even
in Stockholm\'s underground tunnels. Mr. Falkvinge, a \"free source code
writer\" turned politician, did not set up camp there to campaign. He\'s
here because he actually took the subway, alone, to get to our meeting
and, incidentally, to make sure that the Pirate Party literature at the
polling station in the central station was neatly arranged and
accessible. Marginal political leader? Not at all. Launched in 2006, the
Swedish Pirate Party is currently flying high in the polls. At the end
of May, it was projected to be third, behind the Social Democratic Party
and the Moderate (conservative) Party, with 7.9% of the vote. That could
be enough to win a seat in the European Parliament. We\'ll find out on
Monday. In Sweden, it\'s the political phenomenon of the moment. What do
the pirates want? It\'s a party that has no official links to the
Swedish website Pirate Bay - \"apart from the occasional beer here and
there\" - but which shares its philosophy in its entirety and which is
feeding off the revolt generated by the trial and prison sentence in
April of those who set up Pirate Bay. Pirate Bay? It is the world
reference in terms of free downloading and exchange of files on the
web - 22 million members, billions of downloads - and therefore the
target of all the multinationals of the record, film and their lawyers,
who are outraged to see their content shared in this way without earning
them a penny. The Pirate Party follows three principles, explains its
founder. It campaigns for the culture of sharing on the Net, the
liberation of knowledge and the protection of privacy. Its program does
not contain any measures requiring an exchange of money. Its goal is not
to take power, but to hold the balance of power. And to influence.
Basically, explains Mr. Falkvinge, the world must adjust to the profound
structural changes forced by the Internet. Faced with this enormous
machine that allows the infinite exchange of information, it is up to
the citizen, and not the big companies, to decide where to go. What do
we let wander, what do we protect? The party, for its part, responds: we
allow knowledge to circulate, but we protect the lives of citizens. In
other words, yes to downloading and free exchange of films, music,
textbooks or drug formulas. \"Patents,\" says Mr. Falkvinge, \"kill
thousands of people every day by preventing the manufacture of certain
drugs.\" But no to the circulation and access of Internet users\'
personal information, whether to find the author of a comment on a blog
or to personalize the marketing of an online store. The party proposes,
nothing more and nothing less, a redemocratization of access to
knowledge. This anti-big business approach appeals. It appeals in
particular to young people - half of the party\'s members are under 25 -
and to men who form the majority of the party\'s supporters of 47,000
members. \"Supporters often contribute 100 crowns (about \$14),\"
explains the founder. The anti-establishment approach also appeals to
some artists and content authors. \"I have never seen the Pirate Party
as a party that is hostile to creators,\" says Eva Gabrielsson, wife of
the late Stieg Larsson, author of the bestselling Millennium trilogy
that was adapted for the big screen. \"Quite the opposite. Their real
target is distributors, publishers and anyone who makes money off the
backs of creators.\" Swedish author Lars Gustafsson also gave his
support to the party in a letter published in the daily Expressen, in
which he expressed concern about multinationals trying to patent living
organisms. The ideas put forward by the founders of the Pirate Party are
gaining ground. \"They don\'t take a position on all the other social
issues, but the discussion they are starting is interesting,\" says
Margareta Stavling, an activist for the Social Democratic Party. Even
conservatives admit that the party has started a valuable discussion.
\"They\'re silent on the big issues of the day - free trade, organized
crime and environmental protection,\" says Henrik Lundquist, a Moderate
Party activist. \"But I do share some of their concerns about online
privacy.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1209

(January 1986) This teacher was to be the first civilian to go into
space, at NASA\'s expense, but without being part of the astronaut
program. Unfortunately, she was killed with all her companions by the
explosion of the Challenger shuttle shortly after launch. Toyohiro
Akiyama and Helen Sharman (December 1990, 8 days, Mir Station) A
Japanese journalist and a British chemist are therefore the first
civilians to reach space. However, they did not pay for their own
ticket. They had been chosen as part of programs funded by the Russian
agency and various companies. Dennis Anthony Tito (April 2001, 8 days,
International Space Station \[ISS\]) The first real space tourist,
having paid for his own ticket, around \$20 million. After working for
the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL, NASA), he made a fortune by applying
his knowledge to stock portfolio management. He was criticized in the
United States for his association with the Russian program; American
astronauts had refused to train with him, and his reception at the ISS
was frosty. Mark Richard Shuttleworth (April 2002, 10 days, ISS) This
British entrepreneur of South African origin is best known for his work
in the field of computers and open source software. He sold his first
company, Thawte, for \$575 million in 1999. He subsequently used his
capital to develop Linux products such as the Debian operating system
and later Ubuntu. Gregory Hammond \"Greg\" Olsen (October 2005, 10 days,
ISS) Both a scientist and an entrepreneur, Greg Olsen founded an
optoelectronics company. He has also invested in wine production, owns a
ranch in Montana, and teaches physics at Rider University. Civilians in
Space 7 Anousheh Ansari (September 2006, 11 days, ISS) The first woman
to fly as a tourist in space, and also the first Muslim woman in space,
Anousheh Ansari is an Iranian-American, co-founder of the companies
Prodea Systems and Telecom Technologies. Her last name is well known
since the Ansaris were the main sponsors of the X-Prize, awarded to the
first private company to launch a reusable vehicle into space. Charles
Simonyi (April 2007, 12 days; March 2009, 13 days, ISS) This businessman
is best known for his work at Microsoft, where he designed the first
versions of Word and Excel software, which later formed the Office
suite. He now owns his own company, Intentional Software. He has flown
to the space station twice. After dating Martha Stewart for 15 years, he
married a wealthy Swedish woman, 32 years his junior. Guy Laliberté will
celebrate his 50th birthday in orbit on the International Space Station,
where he will travel on September 30 aboard a Soyuz capsule. - AFP photo
Richard Allen Garriott (October 2008, 12 days, ISS) A computer game
designer, author of the Ultima series, he founded the company Origin
with other members of his family. This company is recognized as one of
the most influential in the world of video games. His father, Owen
Garriott, was himself an astronaut for NASA, where he carried out two
missions in space.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1210

In Estonia, the election of MEPs is spread over eleven days. Since 28
May, citizens have been able to vote online by connecting to the
electoral commission website, day or night, from any computer: at home,
at work, at a friend\'s house, or on a public Internet terminal in a
library, bank or internet café. Those with a laptop can have fun voting
standing up in the street, because the territory of Estonia is
crisscrossed by more than a thousand wireless Internet networks. Hede,
married, three children, a marketing consultant, lives in a large house
in a leafy suburb of Tallinn. She is comfortable on the Internet, but
voting is not a trivial act. She decided to do it at home, in the quiet,
early in the morning. No need for a voter card, because like 80% of
Estonians, Hede has an "ID Kaart", an identity card with a highly
sophisticated computer chip with a double secret code. She inserts her
card into a small USB reader connected to her computer and downloads
software in a few seconds. Then she enters her first code to identify
herself, and arrives on the page displaying the candidates: 11 lists and
6 independents, for 6 seats to be filled. She clicks on the IRL party
(moderate right) and confirms her choice by typing her second secret
code, a 5-digit combination which, in Estonia, has the legal status of a
universal electronic signature. "And there you have it," concludes Hede,
"it's true that it's better to concentrate and read the instructions,
but it takes five minutes." » At the same time, on the other side of
town, Kristjan, 28, an anthropology student and graphic designer at a
publishing house, voted on his laptop, set up in his favourite bar,
while having a drink with a girlfriend: \"I was reading a newspaper on
the Internet, there was an article about the European elections, with a
link to the election website. I voted for the Social Democrats. Seven
clicks, one minute of work.\" Here, the Internet is used for everything.
For a decade, the state has invested massively in the creation of IT
networks and services, so much so that today, the country considers
itself a pioneer in \"e-governance\" and \"digital administration\". The
example comes from above. Every Thursday, the Council of Ministers is
held in an ultramodern room set up in the heart of the old State
Chancellery Palace. The ministers arrive empty-handed, and sit around
the oval table in front of laptops. Prime Minister Andrus Ansip reads
the agenda on his screen, using his mouse. All current projects are
published on the government intranet, and preparatory work is done
online throughout the week. The Thursday meeting is therefore mainly
used to validate decisions and resolve disagreements. Lined up along a
wall, six studious young people type at high speed on their keyboards.
They are there to report on the progress of the council in real time on
the Internet - including quarrels and ministerial crises. Each time a
decision is made, they send urgent emails to a list of subscribers,
which allows local media to publish the information live, even before
the end of the council. For several weeks, they have also been sending
alerts on the social network Twitter. The population has followed suit.
This year, 92% of taxpayers filed their tax returns online and 98% of
banking transactions are done via the Internet. Parents have real-time
control over their children\'s school life, as teachers update
individual web pages for each student daily: attendance, grades,
assessments, incidents, homework, etc. Various administrative procedures
and commercial transactions are simplified to the extreme. Thanks to the
ID Kaart\'s double code, any electronic message can be authenticated,
signed, and if necessary, encrypted. The Internet is also used to prepay
for parking and public transport: on trolleybuses, controllers check
that passengers are in order by placing their ID Kaart in a portable
reader connected by GSM to a central server. This system has barely been
completed and is already being transformed. New Estonian mobile phones
are equipped with a chip that can replace the ID Kaart. Users can
therefore carry out various operations directly from their mobile,
without a card or computer. Voting on the Internet does not therefore
appear to be a revolution. The technical operations were entrusted,
after a call for tenders, to SK, a private company with about thirty
employees controlled by Swedish banks and telecommunications companies.
Tarvi Martens, the technical manager of the project, is already jaded:
\"It\'s an additional application of our ID Kaart, nothing more.
Everyone trusts the Internet for their daily life, there was no reason
to exclude the vote from this bouquet of services. Professionally, it\'s
almost routine work.\" Tarvi Martens is confident of his shot: \"We
carried out extensive consultations, everything was checked by various
groups of independent experts. We use free and open software, the
functioning of which is verifiable by everyone.\" Even in the event of a
hacker attack from abroad, the system, according to him, should
withstand the shock: \"Estonia is a small country, it would be possible
to neutralize an attack by cutting off Internet connections with the
rest of the world. » However, when the project was launched in 2005, not
everyone agreed. The Center Party (popular center-left) and the
People\'s Union (former Agrarian Party) feared technical manipulations,
and especially forced votes, under influence. For example, in the
privacy of the home, a domineering husband could force his wife to vote
like him. In a company, a boss could organize an election night, and
pressure his employees to vote under his supervision. Political
activists could go door to door to elderly people with a laptop, and
take advantage of this to guide their choice\... In addition, some
politicians, whose voters were mainly rural or retired, feared that this
new system would primarily attract young urban people, who would
probably not vote for them. After a heated debate, the supporters of
Internet voting won in Parliament, but the President of the Republic
immediately imposed his veto. The law was finally promulgated by
decision of the Constitutional Council, with various safeguards. The
system put in place this year attempts to take into account all the
fears. Between May 28 and June 3, voters will be able to vote online as
many times as they wish, each vote automatically canceling the previous
one. Between June 1 and 3, they will also be able to cancel their
electronic vote by going to drop off a ballot in a box, because some
polling stations will be open during these three days. On June 7,
however, the day of the general election, voters who voted online will
no longer have the right to change their minds. Internet voting, which
was tested during the 2005 municipal elections and then in the 2007
legislative elections, now seems to be accepted by all parties.
Politicians of all stripes hope that it will help to slightly increase
the overall turnout, which is unlikely to exceed 30%. MEP Tunne Kelam,
73, head of the IRL party (moderate right), has announced that he will
vote online. Enn Eesmaa, an MP from the Centre Party, will vote in a
traditional polling station on June 7, to get a little crowd bath. In
the meantime, he is going out into the field to encourage the
inhabitants of his constituency to vote online. His party, which
controls the Tallinn municipality, has taken an initiative that is
contested by its opponents. It has set up around ten green and white
tents in the city, in which young activists equipped with computers
attract passers-by to get them to vote immediately. The tent, pitched in
front of the Kristiine shopping centre, in a working-class district, is
very busy, especially with elderly people, who are afraid of not being
able to do it on their own. An old worker with damaged hands is
struggling to follow the instructions, before realising that he does not
know his second secret code. A saleswoman in the shopping centre has the
method explained at length, then decides she has to come back because
she doesn\'t know who to vote for. A stubborn woman finally manages to
understand how the system works, after three trips to the tent. All day
long, the young activists tirelessly explain the procedure, all the
while smiling. Raivo, 48, an accountant, says he didn\'t need any help.
He decided to vote here spontaneously, after discovering the tent by
chance, as he was leaving the shopping centre: \"The Centre Party was
right to put up these tents, otherwise I might have forgotten to go and
vote.\" Then he adds with a laugh: \"That didn\'t stop me from voting
for the right.\" If all goes well this time, the authorities have
planned that for the 2011 parliamentary elections, Estonians will be
able to vote with their mobile phones.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1211

In collaboration with HEC Montréal, we publish our weekly column on the
challenges facing companies in terms of management. Innovation has
become one of the main levers of competition. Today, competition is also
being played out in the ways of innovating themselves. Promoted in
particular by the economist Chesbrough, and implemented by the largest
companies, an open innovation model is establishing itself against the
old model of closed innovation. Since the beginning of the industrial
era, the idea was that companies should cultivate secrecy, keep their
discoveries confidential and limit their interactions with the outside
world as much as possible in order to concentrate on their own research
and development activities. This approach is being shattered. Inspired
by new technologies such as the Internet, companies can access at any
time varied and scattered knowledge located outside their borders and
combine it with their own. Conversely, they can seek to promote
externally (through partnerships, sales of property rights, or the
creation of spin-offs) internal ideas that are not used within the
company, as 3M or Hewlett-Packard do, for example. They can thus quickly
and effectively articulate dispersed sources of knowledge to realize
opportunities on the market. Priority is now given to open, collective
and collaborative practices, personalized, at all stages of innovation.
A real culture of participation is gradually becoming established,
exploiting in particular the new applications offered by the web (blogs,
wikis, video, Facebook, Twitter, etc.), as well as the new possibilities
of social networking. It is about innovating more, together, better and
faster, recognizing that the creative spark can form at any point in the
innovation process (including among customers) and that rapid access to
the different places where novelty emerges and to the different
stakeholders is entirely strategic. In this context, traditional
strategies - standardization, pressure on costs and productivity - have
shown their limits. New management challenges are emerging: flexibility,
proactivity, specificity, connectivity, etc. The observation is clear:
the old regime of productive efficiency is giving way to a new regime
based on creative intensity, fueled by openness to diversity. Large
companies such as Procter and Gamble or IBM were among the first to
profoundly change their organizational mode to experiment with the open
innovation model. Knowledge sharing practices are available in various
new forms: open source models such as Linux or Wikipedia, crowdsourcing
models that consist of using the creativity, intelligence and know-how
\"of the crowd\", or blogsourcing models, which are based on the idea
that the creation of content, projects or the development of ideas is
done by using a blog as a collaborative creation platform. But to a
large extent the business models of this new industrial regime remain to
be invented. One of Montreal\'s great assets is that it is home to
flagship companies that have articulated creative management models that
are now benchmarks: Cirque du Soleil, Ubisoft, and Sid Lee, among
others, apply profoundly original creative organization solutions.
Cirque has successfully integrated the commercial and artistic aspects,
in particular by opening itself up to sources of inspiration and
creators from around the world. Ubisoft manages its creative talents
through elaborate community coordination methods, mobilizing employees
as well as player-consumers. Sid Lee has developed a \"star\"
organizational model where the client is at the center and the diverse
creative talents of the organization\'s members occupy the branches of
the star. Similar thinking is also being done at the NRC, Bell, IBM
Bromont, and IREQ. If it is important to open up to the world in order
to innovate today, this openness must also occur locally, to draw on the
source of remarkable diversity: Montreal. Our metropolis is indeed rich
in multiple industrial clusters, driven by world-class players and a
multitude of SMEs, but also teeming with scientific research
initiatives, artistic and cultural projects, both established and
underground. This potential for combining ideas and talents is just
waiting to be expressed. At the initiative of the Conférence régionale
des élus (CRÉ), we propose to reflect together on projects that would
make it possible to take full advantage of Montreal\'s creative wealth
during a public thematic day on June 15 at HEC Montréal. The authors:
Patrick Cohendet is a visiting professor in the International Affairs
Department (hec.ca/profs/patrick.cohendet.html) and Laurent Simon is an
associate professor in the Management Education Department
(hec.ca/profs/laurent.simon.html). They are co-founders of the MosaiC
group for research, development and transfer on the theme of management
of creation in the innovation society. To learn more about the public
thematic day on June 15: hec/ecoleete

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1212

What do the Sherbrooke and Montpellier regions of France have in common?
Much more than you might think. So much so that
\"Montpellier-Agglomération\" and Innovation et développement économique
Sherbrooke (IDES) signed an economic collaboration agreement yesterday,
as part of the Rencontres internationales de Sherbrooke et de sa région,
which ends today. This agreement, which also involves the Sherbrooke
Chamber of Commerce and the Sherbrooke University Center, will help
businesses in both regions develop new markets. \"We try to reach
agreements with cities that share the same sectors of activity as us and
the same development philosophy,\" summarizes Gilbert Pastor,
Vice-President of \"Montpellier-Agglomération\". Center of excellence We
are convinced that we have a center of excellence in Sherbrooke. And my
greatest wish is that Sherbrooke becomes the gateway to America for our
businesses and that Montpellier becomes the gateway for Sherbrooke
businesses to Europe,\" he adds. Although Montpellier has 412,000
inhabitants, nearly three times more than Sherbrooke, and has centuries
of history, the two cities share a common concern for the quality of
life of their citizens and culture, focus on innovation and have an
economy focused on knowledge, university research and the health sector.
As the capital of Languedoc-Roussillon, Montpellier is experiencing the
strongest population growth in France. Louis Lagassé, President of IDES,
points out that Sherbrooke set itself the goal at the 2007 Summit of
becoming a capital of innovation by 2012 and that this type of agreement
fits perfectly with this objective. \"We have a lot to learn from
Montpellier. Like them, we want people here to look to the future, but
how can we communicate this better?\" he says. \"Here, we are being bold
in creating businesses. Montpellier businesses need to see what is being
done here and our businesses need to know what is being done there,\"
says Mr. Lagassé. For his part, Pierre Bélanger, Director General of
IDES, emphasizes that \"Sherbrooke will welcome Montpellier businesses
as if they were from Sherbrooke and Montpellier-Agglomeration will act
in the same way with Sherbrooke businesses.\" \"Our respective
organizations will offer \"coaching\" services, which will result in
assistance and advice on feasibility plans, business plans, finding
financing and support for administrative creation,\" he illustrates.
According to Mayor Jean Perrault, the signing of this agreement confirms
the similarities between Sherbrooke and Montpellier: \"It gives us a
gateway to Europe and to business networking. In addition, the agreement
on the recognition of diplomas between France and Quebec will allow for
the mobility of the workforce and we know that we will have 25,000
positions to fill in the coming years,\" he mentions. Among the
delegates from \"Montpellier-Agglomération\" present in Sherbrooke,
there are representatives from five companies, who met with local
business people to explore the possibilities of trade agreements or
partnerships. \"This afternoon (yesterday), I am meeting with Révolution
Linux, from Sherbrooke, which specializes like us in free software,\"
says Pascal Feydel, CEO of ADULLACT, a Montpellier company that makes
\"free\" software, that is to say, free of manufacturing secrets, for
administrations. The delegation from \"Montpellier-Agglomération\" also
went to Montreal and Laval and will go to Quebec City but, assures Mr.
Pastor, the Sherbrooke meeting \"is at the heart of our visit to Quebec
because that historically there were already agreements between the two
cities and our universities.\" According to the president of the
Sherbrooke Chamber of Commerce, Éric Bergeron, the Sherbrooke
International Meetings \"should lead to the creation of an international
network of cities/regions and innovative companies interested in
increasing their multilateral exchanges.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1213

Despite a court order issued on March 12, Microsoft and the Régie des
rentes du Québec are slow to reveal the details of a \$700,000 contract
awarded without a call for tenders to the multinational software
company. Savoir-faire Linux, a small Montreal company specializing in
the implementation of free software, has been contesting in court for
over a year the fact that this contract for the renewal of the operating
systems of the Régie des rentes\' computer equipment was awarded to
Microsoft without any call for tenders. The small company believes that
the government is thus violating the basic rules for awarding public
contracts, in addition to depriving itself of thousands of dollars in
savings thanks to the use of less expensive software. On March 12, Judge
Claude Bouchard of the Superior Court of Quebec ordered that certain
elements of the contract between the Régie des rentes and Microsoft be
disclosed to Savoir-faire Linux, so that it could determine \"the nature
of the contract\" and who the signatories are. Two and a half months
later, no details of the agreement have been transmitted to the company,
La Presse has learned. Savoir-faire Linux, assisted in particular by
lawyer Julius Gray, has now once again approached the Superior Court to
force the two partners to comply with Judge Bouchard\'s order. According
to documents filed with the Court this week, the management of Microsoft
USA (Microsoft Licensing General Partnership) held a teleconference with
its Montreal lawyer, Karim Renno, to discuss the case on May 16. \"The
impression we have is that Microsoft is in charge of the entire file,\"
says Cyrille Béraud, president of Savoir-faire Linux. \"That the
multinational refuses to send us the contract as required by the Court
doesn\'t really surprise me. But that the Régie des rentes is having so
much trouble complying with the court order, I find that more worrying.
Is Microsoft above the State?\" asks Mr. Béraud. Last April, La Presse
revealed that the Ministry of Education also awarded a \$1.32 million
contract to Microsoft without a call for tenders for the purchase of
1,800 Microsoft Office suite licenses. The possibility for the Ministry
to use the Open Office suite instead, a free equivalent that
Savoir-faire Linux offers to some of its clients, was not studied. Since
then, the Quebec government has tabled a draft regulation prohibiting
public bodies from awarding contracts by mutual agreement without first
having \"conducted serious and documented research\" demonstrating that
no other supplier can offer a product that meets their needs.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1214

The Quebec Ministry of Public Security (MSP) has created its own Google
Maps, using free and open source software. The product, which was
originally intended to be used by 9-1-1 centres, could even be of
interest to other ministries. Simon Mercier, a geomatics consultant for
the Ministry of Public Security, presented the results of the MSP\'s
work yesterday at Géodiffusion 2009, a conference that brings together
the main players in the geospatial sector, including two representatives
from the giant Google. \"Geospatial intelligence, with maps and
applications published on the Web and portable devices, will become as
essential as our electrical networks or the telephone,\" began Alex
Miller, president of ESRI Canada, a producer of geographic information
systems. Geographic tools can be used to monitor the evolution of the
recession, he gives as an example. With geospatial tools, the Sears
company was able to optimize its delivery service and save \$50 million
per year, he adds. At the Ministry of Public Security, Mr. Mercier has
been working since 2007 to set up an infrastructure to allow call centre
workers to use geomatics tools. Unlike other organizations that base
their services on Google Maps tools, the MSP instead created its own
system using open source tools such as MapServers and OpenLayers. This
software allows maps to be created very quickly from the extensive data
available in the various ministries, whether it is the health network,
SEPAQ, the Director General of Elections, municipal road maps or
Hydro-Québec electrical addresses. Another advantage of open source
software is that if the final product does not meet expectations, a
fortune has not been spent to set it up. By using data from ministries,
he adds, \"it gives us information that is more up to date than what we
sometimes find on Google Maps. For example, there were postal codes that
were found in the river\...\" By merging all this information into a
single geospatial tool, service providers such as 9-1-1 can make
decisions more quickly and provide better information to teams in the
field. Internal interest But this infrastructure is of interest to other
ministries, notes Simon Mercier. \"We didn\'t want to work in isolation.
We are integrators and we have access to data from almost all
ministries. What will this ultimately lead to? We don\'t know yet.\"
Simon Mercier hopes that other users will be able to benefit from it,
but there are still problems to resolve regarding the protection of
personal information. \"There has already been a big step forward in
liberalizing information within the government, but more needs to be
done so that other application creators can use it. This data exists and
we paid for it, we need to make it available.\" It is possible to
quickly create maps from the many data from different ministries
passelin@lesoleil.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1215

Can you legally equip your computer with free programs? While the noose
is tightening on those who illegally download music or films from the
Internet, the installation of so-called \"free\" software, often free,
remains authorized and is growing rapidly. Appearing as the Web was
taking off, free software was often created by academics or young
computer scientists wishing to offer an alternative to paid programs. A
community of open source software programmers has gradually formed, in
reaction to the stranglehold of publishing giants such as Microsoft.
Unlike most paid products, the software is provided with the \"source
code\" (programming lines). \"In short, the \"recipe\" of the program is
given with it\", explains Tangui Morlier, vice-president of the
Association for the promotion and research in free computing (April). It
is then possible to modify it to improve it or remake it. FIXES AND
IMPROVEMENTS In addition to being free, these software programs
regularly benefit from new versions that correct potential bugs or
provide improvements at a rate that is often faster than paid programs.
The most famous free software - present on more than one computer in
ten - is Linux. This operating system, which appeared in the early
1990s, is an alternative to Microsoft\'s Windows. It is adopted by a
growing number of companies or administrations who see it as a way to
reduce costs, since there is no license to pay. Computer manufacturers
have even installed it on some of their machines such as Netbooks. Here
too, it is a question of saving money in order to be able to sell
cheaper products. Another advantage: \"Linux is more secure, because it
is less susceptible to virus attacks,\" observes Mr. Morlier. However,
few individuals convert to Linux, \"mainly for psychological reasons,\"
regrets Anne Nicolas, one of the directors of Mandriva, a company that
offers turnkey solutions that bring together several programs running on
Linux. \"This operating system is synonymous with complexity for a
majority of people who learned to use a computer with Windows,\" she
explains. Specialists recognize that certain peripherals - printers for
example - can sometimes encounter problems running under Linux. Mandriva
offers a solution that allows Linux to be installed on a machine without
having to remove Windows. However, there is no need to adopt Linux to
use free software. There is one for almost any function and all run
perfectly under the Windows platform or even on a Mac. These programs,
available for free download on the Internet, will coexist with paid
software. One of the most famous is Firefox, an Internet browser whose
performance is considered superior to Microsoft\'s product. Open Office,
an office suite that combines a word processor and a spreadsheet, is
also widely used. VLC Media player can play audio files as well as most
video files. As for Gimps, it offers a very powerful photo editing
program. There are even free software for more specific functions:
personal finance management, vector drawing, blogging engines, etc.
FAVOR OFFICIAL SITES It is difficult to accurately measure the
development of free software. In France, more than 30% of Internet
surfing is done via Firefox. According to figures from the Pierre Audoin
Consultants firm, the free software market grew by 51.1% in France in
2008 and is expected to increase by 38.8% this year. These figures
underestimate the phenomenon, because they only track the development of
paid free software. They generally include support contracts and are
mainly aimed at businesses. On the other hand, for individuals, \"free
software\" is, most of the time, synonymous with free. Be careful,
however, not to be fooled by sites that offer to download software on
condition that you send an SMS or call a telephone number, which are
generally surcharged. There is a great risk of paying for nothing. It is
better to favor official sites, even if they do not appear among the
first on the list given by the Internet search engine. n

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1216

On the screen, a Star Wars ship takes off from the ground. Another
screen: a handball moves towards the left or right goal. On another
computer, the visitor moves through a virtual museum. Nothing out of the
ordinary on the surface, at a time when video games are increasingly
sophisticated, except that these movements are not controlled by a
joystick, but directly by thought. This brain-computer interface works
thanks to French software, OpenVIBE. The result of cooperation between
the National Institute for Research in Computer Science and Automation
(Inria) and the National Institute of Health and Medical Research
(Inserm), this program was presented on Wednesday, May 13. The project
was launched in 2005, at a time when this type of research was not very
developed in France. It received funding of more than 640,000 euros from
the National Research Agency (ANR), support that will continue.
Brain-computer interfaces operate according to a simple principle:
collect electrical signals emitted during brain activity, process them
and translate them into commands for a computer or to control a machine.
The applications are intended for both the video game and assistance
fields for people with disabilities. The French Association against
Myopathies (AFM) is one of the six partners involved in the project.
\"FILTERING PARASITIC NOISE\" The OpenVIBE system is based on the
electrical signals emitted by the brain for a given task, which are
collected using a flexible headset equipped with electrodes. First, the
user actually performs the requested gesture: moving their feet or one
of their hands. Second, they are asked to perform the gesture in
thought, without movement. \"We start with a data acquisition phase.
Then, after filtering the parasitic noise from the signal, comes the
data extraction phase. The software \"learns\". \"It classifies the
mental state characteristic of the user\'s thoughts,\" explains Anatole
Lécuyer (Inria). OpenVIBE is then able to transmit the command from the
electrical signals emitted when the person imagines an action, while the
subject controls the execution of the task he has thought of on the
screen. OpenVIBE is also a communication aid tool, in particular through
an application that can detect a given letter and, thus, dictate words.
The subject faces a screen on which the letters of the alphabet,
arranged in the form of a table, are successively flashed. He mentally
counts each time the desired letter is illuminated. During the
demonstration, once the subject has reached 10, the chosen letter is
displayed in a field provided for the text to be dictated. Under these
conditions, several seconds are required per letter, but the delay can
be shortened by reducing the number of flashes required. The software
\"can also be useful for trying to communicate an instruction given to a
person in a coma or in a vegetative state, in order to detect the
cerebral expression of a response,\" says Olivier Bertrand of Inserm.
Similarly, in addition to applications for video games, OpenVIBE could
be used for therapeutic purposes for what are called \"serious games.\"
For example, \"neurofeedback,\" applied to pain (tinnitus, \"phantom
limb\" in an amputee) or attention deficit with agitation. The technique
consists of decoding these brain signals and sending the information
back to the person, asking them to regulate their response. \"It\'s
about generating cerebral plasticity in relation to a dysfunction linked
to a disability, by helping the cerebral cortex to reorganize itself,\"
says Olivier Bertrand. The software also appears to be a neuroscience
research tool for exploring the neural mechanisms that support
adaptation and cerebral plasticity.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1217

For Petra Friedmann, CEO of Opodo France, Switzerland and Belgium, an
online travel agency, the economic crisis has not affected this
distribution channel, because it is, according to her, best suited to
the constraints that consumers must face to satisfy their desire to
escape. After seven years of activity, Opodo is in the top three online
travel agencies in France. How is this sector reacting to the crisis and
the resulting drop in purchasing power? We are indeed seeing a decline
in bookings and departures, but this is still not the case for online
travel, which continues to grow. For Opodo, in France, for example, the
number of transactions increased by 40% in the first quarter of 2009
compared to the same period in 2008. The crisis is only accentuating a
phenomenon that we have been detecting for six years now - in particular
thanks to our Opodo barometer on French people\'s holidays - namely the
decline in \"travel power\" and the trade-offs made by consumers in an
effort to maintain it. Purchasing services via the Web is one of the
main tools that the French have seized to optimize their spending: 30%
of those who go on holiday now buy their trips this way. This formula
not only offers competitive prices, it completely revolutionizes the way
people approach their holidays by offering unparalleled freedom of
comparison and choice. In 2008, you achieved a 52% increase in sales
volume, for a profit of 6 million euros. How do you explain this result?
In 2005, travel agencies lost the commission paid by airlines on each
ticket sold. The industry\'s responses to this earthquake were varied:
specialization in the high-end, diversification, but also a wait-and-see
attitude\... fatal for some, because the crisis left them no time to
carry out a controlled restructuring. On the other hand, our choice was
quick and very simple. We had to refocus on our expertise: distribution.
Success could only come from maintaining profitability on the sale of
the most difficult product: the airline ticket. If we succeeded in the
core business, we could also succeed in the rest. So we overhauled our
entire activity: the organization, the IT platform, the marketing
models, the \"pricin g\" \[pricing\]\... Initially based in Germany,
then in Switzerland, customer relations is now based in France, in a
specialized call center where only travel agents working exclusively for
Opodo work. The satisfaction rate was felt: 97%. Beyond 2008, it is now
that these efforts will bear fruit. We are a low-cost structure, so we
can guarantee the lowest price, and generate margins that will allow us
to continue to invest in quality and gain market share. While many
companies choose to outsource their IT tools, you have chosen to manage
them internally. Have you really benefited from this? Yes. Since all
aspects of our business go through IT - an efficient and targeted
customer service cannot exist without suitable tools - I have tried to
apply a simple rule: to react quickly to market changes, to innovate,
you have to eliminate all third-party stakeholders. Internalizing the IT
tool first guarantees the possibility of defining and controlling your
own development philosophy through ongoing dialogue between user teams
and IT specialists. It offers incomparable responsiveness and the
reversibility of any modification. With us, no project lasts more than
three months. Internalization has also encouraged the use of \"free\"
software \[developers can freely intervene on the software\], factors of
flexibility and savings. Finally, it has built a common culture of teams
by capitalizing on experiences. Many online travel sites have the same
architecture. How do you plan to differentiate yourself in the future?
We tend to look for the \"killer application\", the technological tool
supposed to make the difference, but I don\'t think things work like
that. I am convinced that, in the future, success with the consumer will
obey the same rules as today: listen to them and provide them with the
best quality/price ratio, a very easy-to-use site and quality service.
Especially if we think that consumer trends will increasingly focus on
the essentials. Are you optimistic for 2009, despite the economic
slowdown and the A flu? For the sector, I fear that 2009 will not be a
good year. It is very likely that, in the coming months, travel will be
less frequent. For Opodo, I remain optimistic, because we are
particularly well equipped. But you don\'t do this job without a good
dose of optimism! It also requires a real capacity for resilience.
Because if we count, without even mentioning September 11, 2001, how
many natural disasters, conflicts, wars, epidemics, immediately
(over)publicized, have we experienced since the beginning of the
century! And yet, each time, the machine starts up again\... Because
exchange, travel, leisure, are essential human needs. \"Travel more to
live more\", in a way\...

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1218

No preamble, no bowing and turning with Christian Paul. In his cluttered
and impersonal office in the National Assembly - only a penguin \"Paul
President\", the mascot of the free software Linux, is hanging on the
coat rack - this PS deputy from Nièvre attacks head on at the mere
mention of the word Hadopi. The speech is ultra-rehearsed and solidly
argued, the elocution rich and easy, and there is no other solution,
when one wishes to intervene, than to interrupt this perfectly oiled
oratorical mechanism. Inexhaustible on the subject, this \"download
musketeer\", as the one who never ceases to advocate the legalization of
non-commercial exchanges on the Web is sometimes nicknamed, has once
again pulled off a great coup. He and his colleagues from the left have
caused the final vote on the \"Creation and Internet\" law to fail,
which, for the trouble, has returned to Parliament for a second reading.
This is to say that this former Secretary of State for Overseas
Territories under Lionel Jospin, author of several reports on digital
issues, is synonymous with nightmare for the two successive Ministers of
Culture who have tackled the subject. His opponents at least recognize
this quality in him: consistency on an eminently complex subject. \"Of
all our opponents, he is undoubtedly the most convinced,\" says a member
of the majority. \"But he quickly tends to take others for fools when
people do not share his point of view. He is not demagogic but tough,
sure of himself and sectarian.\" The commitment to the legalization of a
space for \"non-commercial\" exchanges on the Web of this elected
official from a very rural region in which the arrival of broadband was
a \"resounding event\" goes back to 2004. Precisely to a column in
Libération in which he did not hesitate to respond to some of his sacred
monsters like Patrice Chéreau (he owes him the discovery of Wagner\'s
Ring on television) to denounce illusory \"Maginot lines on the Net\"
and a crusade against \"piracy\" - he refutes the term which, according
to him, falls under \"maritime law\". \"I was a little intimidated to
oppose creators whose work I deeply admire,\" he admits. But since then,
the leather has become tanned and I am certain that the artists, who are
constantly being exploited, will know how to sort things out when all
this excitement has died down.\" What \"saddens\" this lover of
contemporary art and opera is not opposing the bosses of major record
labels such as Pascal Nègre, but having to confront those he calls his
\"buddies\", the independents. \"Buddys\" who today feel \"betrayed\" by
the left and to whom, he says, have been sold a \"security illusion\"
while the law \"is not going to bring in a euro for their artists\".
Christian Paul belongs to this left imbued with the idea of progress
that was yesterday said to be productivist and which keeps all its faith
in the future. In this new digital world where \"nothing will be the
same again\", he is certain, different forms of access to culture can
coexist in a joyful mix of commercial and non-commercial models. Utopia?
\"Not at all,\" says this father of three teenagers who practice
\"anticipatory legalization\" at home without asking himself at each
site visited whether it is \"legal or not, it makes no sense to them.\"
A great reader - he gets his supplies at the La Hune bookstore in
Saint-Germain-des-Prés - this reputed \"hard worker\" nourishes his
discourse with an assiduous reading of the \"classics\" of
post-industrial society, this other name for digital civilization of
which Hadopi is said to be \"the first great political battle.\" From
the already distant Nora-Minc report on the computerization of society
in the 1970s to the American theorist of copyleft - as opposed to
copyright - Lawrence Lessig, from the Spanish network sociologist Manuel
Castells to Jacques Attali, via the economist Daniel Cohen, this
agitator of concepts to whom Martine Aubry entrusted the reins of the
new internal think tank of the PS has absorbed a lot to understand how
the Internet is radically transforming society. \"Our project is based
on a vision of the immaterial economy in embryo,\" he says. \"Rather
than exhausting its energy repressing a new cultural practice as if it
were a \"social pathology,\" the government would be more inspired to
convert it into a creative policy.\" This \"creative\" person, this
\"expert in political engineering\" as his Burgundian
\"brother-in-arms\" Arnaud Montebourg describes him, is convinced that
the left will know, as in the past, \"how to find solutions\" to
perpetuate the French model of cultural exception. \"We established a
single price for books and maintained bookstores, we saved cinema by
having it financed by television,\" he sums up. I don\'t see why we
wouldn\'t be able to find mechanisms to allow Beaumarchais\' copyright
to reinvent itself in the era of networks.\" Let it be said, this
enthusiast for regional planning and specialist in hospital maps does
not feel like a \"libertarian\". \"I do not mythologize technology and I
am aware of its dangers,\" he explains. \"That is why I have always been
in favor of strong regulation of the Internet, but we will not make
something new out of something old. Ask Susan Boyle \[the 47-year-old
Scottish singer revealed by the show Britain\'s Got Talent, editor\'s
note\] if she regrets the existence of the Internet?\" The optimist made
man, this Christian Paul\... It must be said that life seems to have
rather spoiled this false nice guy who \"sometimes feels like hitting
out\" at a government \"bearer of revealed truth\". Born in
Clermont-Ferrand in a modest and Christian-democrat background - \"I
broke off after my first communion\" he specifies -, this leader and
brilliant student, accustomed to the role of class representative, fell
into politics early. A child of Mitterrand and the Common Programme,
raised between Althusser and Alain Touraine, he joined the Socialist
Party in 1978 in a working-class section. A fine swordsman, the lover of
words that hit the mark first saw himself as a lawyer before going to
Paris to study Sciences-Po and then the ENA. A classic path that led him
to an internship in this Nièvre Morvan region that he would never leave
again and which allowed him to go and recharge his batteries every
weekend in a very concrete field laboratory. It was there that this
former sub-prefect, who worked in various ministerial offices and
briefly at Beaubourg, would find his electoral ties and his new job as a
full-time elected official, starting with the town hall of Lormes, 1,500
inhabitants, before becoming a deputy and vice-president of the Burgundy
region. A man of files rather than apparatus, this former \"Jospin
baby\" has been involved in all the \"renovations\" of the old house:
with his friend Arnaud Montebourg at the NPS, Ségolène Royal and now
with Martine Aubry, whom he is pleased to welcome, after the Hollande
\"extinguisher\", that she is putting the party back to work. An
original alloy, this neo-rural and progressive intellectual who fell
into the digital pot.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1219

We were expecting IBM, but it will be Oracle. By announcing on Monday
the acquisition of Sun Microsystems, the inventor of Java (the Internet
application development language developed in 1995) by the king of
databases, Oracle created a surprise. At \$7.4 billion (€5.7 billion),
this friendly offer is in fact barely higher than IBM\'s last proposal,
rejected two weeks ago and then deemed insufficient. \"I am very, very
surprised,\" reacted Microsoft CEO Steve Ballmer, as were Deutsche Bank
analysts, who considered this transaction \"surprising.\" At first
glance, these two companies, although partners for more than twenty
years and both born under the Silicon Valley sun in the early 1980s,
have little in common. Despite a voracious acquisition spree to
strengthen its range of business services (\$35 billion in four years),
Oracle remains above all a software supplier, number 2 in the sector
worldwide behind Microsoft. As for Sun, number 4 in corporate servers,
it is above all a giant in the sale of hardware, servers in this case,
with which it achieves 60% of its activity. Open source. This marriage
of software and equipment, software and hardware, is precisely Oracle\'s
bet to make the new entity a supplier of global solutions capable of
competing with the biggest such as HP, IBM, and even Microsoft. \"Oracle
is now able to provide all the pieces of an assembly of technologies
that fit together perfectly,\" explains Larry Ellison, CEO of Oracle,
the third richest person in the United States and a sailing enthusiast
since he has already participated in two America\'s Cups. From hard
drives to software, including operating and storage systems, almost the
entire information technology value chain will be brought together in a
single solution. Which, Ellison specifies, will save customers from
having to assemble these usually separate elements themselves. A sort of
professional equivalent of what the Apple environment is for the general
public. Gems. A strategic shift for Oracle, this marriage also allows it
to get its hands on two technological gems from Sun: the Java language,
which now extends to smartphone applications, and the Solaris operating
system, on which most of Oracle\'s databases run. Very attached to the
proprietary and paid software model, Oracle also gets its hands on
MySQL, an \"open\" and opensource database that Sun had acquired for \$1
billion several years ago. With a culture clash and some integration
difficulties in perspective, since it is hard to imagine Oracle
promoting this free alternative when the core of its activity consists
precisely in charging for this type of service. While the 30,000
employees of Sun Microsystems could well pay the price of this marriage
(during previous Oracle buyouts such as PeopleSoft or Siebel, thousands
of employees were laid off), this operation should, Oracle promises, be
immediately profitable, with 1.5 billion dollars of profits in the first
year and more than 2 billion by 2011. If the announcement of this buyout
logically caused the Sun Microsystems share price to jump (+ 36%), long
losing momentum due to the company\'s continuous decline in recent
years, Oracle\'s strategic shift does not seem to have convinced the
markets, which are expecting a significant decline in high-tech
investments this year due to the crisis.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1220

B2I The computer and Internet certificate recognizes the skills students
acquired at the end of primary school, at the end of middle school and
at the end of high school, in the field of digital uses. The system is
supplemented, in higher education, by a C2I level 1 that all students
must obtain, and a C2I level 2, necessary for any future teacher. BLOG
Contraction of Web and log, logbook, notebook. They are hugely popular
among French teenagers. Skyblog hosts around 13 million of them. More
and more teachers are using them for educational purposes. EAD Distance
learning, now synonymous with e-learning. ENT Digital work environment.
The ENT is a virtual office on which each member of the educational
community has a space, teachers, administrative staff, educational
advisors, nurses, students, parents of students. Accessible from home,
its rise in power raises the problem of the digital divide (read below).
ETWINNING European Commission programme for electronic twinning between
European primary and secondary schools around educational projects.
France has just exceeded 6,000 registered establishments. DIGITAL DIVIDE
The separation between those who are connected and those who are not,
often low-income families. Only 47% of households have access to the
Internet. It is the paradox of France to be the European leader in
broadband access but not among the good students in the development of
home computing. GEEK Person, generally a teenager, passionate about
computers and video games. To be differentiated from \"nolife\", who
have become addicted. SERIOUS GAMES or serious games. Derived from video
games, they have long been used in continuing education as learning
vectors. They remain almost foreign to initial training in France. To be
published in June, a European study by European Schoolnet on the use of
electronic games in schools. OPENSOURCE Software license called free,
assuming its free distribution and its open source code so that it can
be modified by its user according to their needs. IWB OR IWB Whiteboard,
or digital, interactive. A computer screen the size of a blackboard,
which is controlled by touch using a stylus. An important technological
advance: it combines the teacher\'s frontal relationship with his class
and all digital resources. TICE Information and communication
technologies for education. The application of digital technology to
school and university systems. WEB 2.0 Use of the Internet that allows
the Internet user to interact with the content of Web pages and to
identify with a community. WIKI Website that allows you to modify or
create your pages without knowing a computer language. The most famous
example: the collaborative encyclopedia Wikipedia.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1221

ARTS TEACHER at the Mendès-France high school in Péronne (Somme), Bruno
Deshayes has been using information and communication technologies for
teaching (ICT) since 1998. He is also preparing to show, during the high
school\'s cultural day on April 17, a one-hour film retracing the
students\' work since 1999. This work was made possible thanks to the
equipment made available to everyone in the arts room: fourteen
computers equipped with photo editing software (Photoshop), or free
graphics software (Gimp), printers, overhead projector, cameras and
cameras that can be used to archive each stage of a project. \"We were
pioneers in this area and we were right,\" he says happily. For the past
three years, students have been able to present three-minute videos and
2D and 3D productions for their baccalaureate exams. It is much more
democratic intellectually, because it allows students who do not know
how to draw well to get very good grades because they still had things
to express.\" In terms of teaching, everything is also different.
According to Mr. Deshayes, movement around the room is freer, which
encourages sharing and research. The students do not get rowdy, however,
since they are more interested, and they feel valued by the preservation
of their work. \"The new horizons offered by technology also encourage
greater questioning on the part of the students. It gives them openings
that were unimaginable before,\" the teacher continues. They do not
hesitate to make short films with video cameras or their cell phones. Of
course, I manage all of that, but they are already used to blogs, and
know that you don\'t put just anything online. Ultimately, it is the
entire educational relationship that is shaken up. It enriches my
lessons and my exchanges with students. Sometimes, they are the ones who
show me a new application.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1222

Acer is now playing in the big leagues and is keen to make it known. The
Taiwanese computer manufacturer, which in the space of two years has
gone from fifth to third place worldwide behind the Americans
Hewlett-Packard (HP) and Dell, held a press tour at the beginning of
April - Tuesday 7 April in New York, Wednesday 8 in Beijing and Thursday
9 in Amsterdam - accompanied by a massive advertising campaign in the
press. The opportunity for its president, the Italian Gianfranco Lanci,
to present a slew of new machines and to proclaim an ambition that is
striking in this period of crisis: to increase its sales of portable PCs
by 30% to 40% in 2009 compared to 2008 and to become the world number
one in this segment within two years. A simple assembler for major
Western brands in the early 2000s, Acer has managed to make a name for
itself thanks to an aggressive pricing policy made possible by very low
overheads: the group does not have its own factory or distribution
network and subcontracts all the assembly of its machines, mainly in
China. It has also conquered a large share of the market by managing to
take control, one after the other in 2007, of two well-known American
companies: Gateway, particularly appreciated by professionals in the
United States, and Packard Bell, well established in Europe with the
general public. In recent months, Acer has further reduced the gap with
HP and Dell thanks to the overwhelming success of \"mini-laptops\",
computers under \$500 with modest technical performance, equipped with a
minimum of applications, mainly intended for surfing the Internet. A
wise policy: according to the Anglo-Saxon research firm Gartner, in
2009, only this segment of the market will be growing in the IT sector.
It was not Acer, but another Taiwanese company, Asustek, who first
launched a range of mini-portable PCs, the Eee PC, at the end of 2007.
Acer followed suit at the beginning of 2008. The managers of HP and
Dell, on the other hand, were surprised by the overwhelming success of
these small machines, and their competing products only began to arrive
on the market six months later. \"At that time, we didn\'t really
believe in PCs with 7- or 8-inch screens and a Linux operating system
\[free software\] that wasn\'t comfortable enough to use for sales to
take off. \"We waited until we had PCs with a screen size of at least 10
inches and a Microsoft operating system, which is easier to use for the
general public, before launching,\" explains Olivier Gillet, marketing
director at HP France. Thanks to mini-laptops, Acer became number one in
Europe in the third quarter of 2008 in sales of laptops, the market
segment that professionals are most interested in today, because the
desktop PC market is losing ground. It was the launch by Intel, the
world\'s leading semiconductor manufacturer, of the \"Atom\" processor,
which is particularly compact and energy-efficient, that enabled the
marketing of mini-laptops. Thanks to offers coupled with telephone
subscriptions from telecommunications operators, these machines have
been a huge success in Europe. 6 million units have been sold, half of
global sales according to Gartner. Operators offer a subsidized machine
equipped with a \"3G\" key, which once connected to the computer allows
wireless Internet access via mobile phone networks. \"They are perfect
as a second device, especially for professionals who travel a lot. They
also arrive at a time when consumers are paying much more attention to
their spending, explains Bruno Lakehal, an analyst at Gartner. Despite
their price, mini-laptops do not yet work in developing countries, where
telephone networks are not yet sufficiently developed to ensure a good
Internet connection.\" But the success of mini-laptops has its perverse
effects. Their low price has reduced the already low financial margin of
manufacturers. As a result, today, Acer and its competitors are trying
to increase their margins again by \"segmenting\" their product ranges,
that is to say by increasing the number of limited series,
collaborations with designers, technical additions, in order to be able
to sell them at a higher price. During its press tour, Acer presented a
very thin PC called \"Timeline\", in the same vein as Apple\'s Macbook
Air, for 800 euros. In the same spirit, HP launched a \"mininote\"
designed by New York designer Vivian Tam and a 12-inch laptop that
allows you to use more demanding computer applications than a simple
office suite.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1223

\"Pay for free and powerful software\" is the slogan of the poster
available on the Zone libre en éducation website to promote the free
office software Open Office. We invite you to print it and display it
everywhere, especially in teachers\' rooms or computer labs. Giving
students the option of using free office software rather than imposing
paid software saves money and prevents computer piracy. bit. ly/llEjU

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1224

Specializing in intelligent computer systems for business management,
Sherbrooke-based Dunin Technologie Inc. is among the Estrie companies
selected as finalists in the 23rd edition of the OCTAS 2009 competition
held Wednesday in Montreal. Nominated in the \"innovation\" category for
companies with fewer than 20 employees, Dunin is among the 77 finalists
selected. In all, 22 winning organizations will be crowned in as many
categories on May 23 at the Palais des Congrès de Montréal. The OCTAS
competition aims to showcase Quebec information technology projects.
Dunin Technologie was selected for its \"Dynamic Scheduling and
Real-Time Floor Management\" project, which allows companies to save
time and energy through closely monitored computer management of their
various tasks. \"We invested more than three years of research into this
project,\" emphasizes Serge Dumoulin, the company\'s president. \"What
is also attractive about this technology is how easy it is to deploy in
a company. Our recent interventions were completed in less than three
months with a return on investment in the fourth month.\" The risk is
minimal for customers, says Éric Gauthier, Vice President of Dunin
Technologie: \"In times of crisis, people are more cautious about
investing, so we finance our customers ourselves to help them achieve a
competitive level of performance by using our solution.\" In addition to
Dunin, among the Estrie finalists is Bombardier Produits Récréatifs in
the \"infrastructure\" category. The Université de Sherbrooke is a
finalist twice for \"la relève étudiante universitaire\", including once
for a dynamic malware analysis project in partnership with the
Sherbrooke company Révolution Linux. Révolution Linux is also a partner
with finalist Plastik MP (from Richmond and Epsilon Technologies in a
project in the \"free software business solution\" category called
\"adaptation and implementation of OpenERP\". Also among the finalists
is the company Boréal Informations Stratégiques (Boréalis), from Magog,
in the \"business intelligence\" category. Nmedia Solution, from
Drummondville, is also a finalist, in the \"consumer electronic
business\" category as a partner in the RONA Prêts-à-rénover site
project.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1225

Without issuing any call for tenders, the Ministry of Education awarded
a \$1.32 million contract to Microsoft to acquire 1,800 licenses for the
Microsoft Office Professional 2007 office suite. In addition to these
1,800 licenses, all school boards in the province will also have to
provide their employees with computers equipped with the Office 2007
Professional software \"as of this spring.\" \"There was no call for
tenders, because only Microsoft provides the Office 2007 software,\" is
the justification given by the Ministry of Education. This explanation
makes Cyrille Béraud, president of Savoir-faire Linux, a Montreal firm
that specializes in implementing free software in businesses, laugh.
\"It\'s as if the government were changing its vehicle fleet for BMWs by
saying that only BMW makes BMWs,\" he says. The Ministry of Education
will pay \$733 per licence for the use of Microsoft Office 2007.
Installing a free and open source equivalent such as Open Office would
cost a fraction of that price, estimates Savoir-faire Linux. \"The
simple fact of putting us in competition in a call for tenders against
Microsoft would probably have forced Microsoft to lower its price,\"
estimates Mr. Béraud. \"It\'s a good example of the stranglehold this
multinational has on the government. And that\'s just the tip of the
iceberg.\" In March 2008, Savoir-faire Linux filed a lawsuit against the
Régie des rentes du Québec, after the latter announced that it intended
to entrust Microsoft, without a call for tenders, with the renewal of
the licences for the operating systems of its computer equipment. \"The
contracts that the government concludes with Microsoft are always very
opaque,\" says Mr. Béraud. According to what La Presse has learned,
Microsoft will soon have to open its books, at least in part. In
mid-March, the Superior Court of Quebec ordered the Régie des rentes to
provide Savoir-faire Linux with certain details of the contracts it
awarded to the Silicon Valley multinational. This Superior Court
decision comes at a time when governments around the world have begun to
adopt open source software to save on licensing fees. In France, the
National Gendarmerie and the Directorate General of Taxes have swapped
all their Microsoft Office software suites for their open equivalent,
Open Office. They each claim to save tens of thousands of euros per
year. In the Netherlands, since 2007, under a policy called comply or
explain, the government must promote the acquisition of free and open
source software, failing which it must publicly explain its choice. \"In
Quebec, there is clearly a lack of political will for free software to
take off,\" says Louis Martin, holder of the Logiciellibre, finance
sociale et solidaire chair at UQAM.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1226

Without issuing any call for tenders, the Ministry of Education awarded
a \$1.32 million contract to Microsoft to acquire 1,800 licenses for the
Microsoft Office Professional 2007 office suite. In addition to these
1,800 licenses, all school boards in the province will also have to
provide their employees with computers equipped with the Office 2007
Professional software \"as of this spring.\" \"There was no call for
tenders, because only Microsoft provides the Office 2007 software,\" is
the justification given by the Ministry of Education. This explanation
makes Cyrille Béraud, president of Savoir-faire Linux, a Montreal firm
that specializes in implementing free software in businesses, laugh.
\"It\'s as if the government were changing its vehicle fleet for BMWs by
saying that only BMW makes BMWs,\" he says. The Ministry of Education
will pay \$733 per license for the use of Microsoft Office 2007.
Installing a free and open source equivalent like Open Office would cost
a fraction of that price, estimates Savoir-faire Linux. \"The simple
fact of putting us in competition in a call for tenders against
Microsoft would probably have forced Microsoft to lower its price,\"
estimates Mr. Béraud. \"It\'s a good example of the stranglehold that
this multinational has on the government. And that\'s just the tip of
the iceberg.\" In March 2008, Savoir-faire Linux filed a lawsuit against
the Régie des rentes du Québec, after the latter announced that it
intended to entrust Microsoft, without a call for tenders, with the
renewal of the operating system licenses for its computer equipment.
According to what La Presse has learned, Microsoft will soon have to
open its books, at least in part. In mid-March, the Superior Court of
Quebec ordered the Régie des rentes to provide Savoir-faire Linux with
certain details of the contracts it awarded to the Silicon Valley
multinational. This Superior Court decision comes at a time when
governments around the world have begun to adopt open source software to
save on licensing fees. \"In Quebec, there is clearly a lack of
political will for free software to take off,\" says Louis Martin,
holder of the Logiciellibre, finance sociale et solidaire chair at UQAM.
\"The problem is that there is a profound lack of understanding of what
this software is. It is obviously not a panacea, but it is a solution
that deserves to be studied seriously,\" he believes.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1227

(TM) From one school board (CS) to another, the most popular sites on
the Web are judged differently. YouTube is thus authorized in the
establishments of the CS des Navigateurs, but not in those of the
Découvreurs. Overview of the different techniques and the \"logic\"
underlying the blockages. The Commission scolaire (CS) de la Capitale
uses the services of a firewall software managed by an external firm.
Thus, a category of sites and subjects deemed controversial are blocked.
\"This is the case for sites with the words: sex, violence, adult
material or hacking,\" specifies spokesperson Marie-Hélène Dion. The
software is updated regularly. Claude Lajoie, director of IT services,
recognizes that \"the line can be thin\" and that the software can
censor a sex education site by confusing it with an adult site. \"A web
link that describes a panda\'s sexual organ is not necessarily
pornographic,\" he says. At the CS des Navigateurs, on the South Shore,
communications coordinator Louise Boivert explains that blocking is done
through a subscription to blacklist.org. \"It\'s free software with the
Linux system that costs us \$600 per year,\" she says. \"It detects and
blocks thousands of sites according to their theme: drinking, firearms,
gambling, aggression and pornography.\" Sites that take up too much
bandwidth can also be blocked. The sharing line remains the
\"educational content\" of Internet references. This is why the social
networking site Facebook is censored for \"lack of educational
content,\" while the video sharing site YouTube is freely accessible.
\"You can listen to music and learn to play certain instruments there,\"
according to Ms. Boisvert. On the side of the CS des Découvreurs, Claire
Savard explains the blocking of YouTube by \"traffic management (on the
bandwidth)\". Faced with problems comparable to those of the CS de la
Capitale, the managers of the CS des Premières-Seignoiries are in the
process of implementing a new control system. \"With the old system,
which was not that old, it happened that a site with a .com extension
was censored, but not the same site with the .ca extension\",
acknowledges Langis Michaud, manager of the IT department. A new
firewall, produced by the firm Fortinet, was installed last week. A
preliminary version, which still has to be approved by the competent
authorities, bans sites that contain racism or hate and those devoted to
hacking and pornography. It authorizes links that discuss child abuse,
abortion, homosexuality and plagiarism.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1228

Halfway between a laptop and a smartphone, this communicating device has
enjoyed astonishing success since its appearance a year ago. They are
perfect for surfing the Internet by connecting to a Wi-Fi or 3G network,
managing emails, contacting friends on Facebook, video conferencing or
using office applications. Mini-laptops, also called netbooks, have
found their audience in less than a year in a market segment that few
initially believed in. According to the GfK marketing research
institute, from 10,000 units sold in France in January 2008, this figure
jumped to 104,000 last December. 500,000 netbooks were sold last year in
our country, including 362,000 direct sales, the rest being made by
mobile operators. Asus was the first to draw the gun, at the beginning
of 2008, with its famous Eee PC. Users are discovering with interest the
virtues of this lightweight and communicative mini-laptop, sold for less
than 400 euros (it is also offered by SFR with a 3G key and a dedicated
subscription). Of course, the screen is only 7 to 8 inches, the keyboard
remains difficult to grasp because of narrow keys, and the battery life
is limited, but success is there and many manufacturers are rushing into
the breach. We have identified up to 17 brands distributed in France.
Faced with this fierce competition, prices continue to fall (as well as
manufacturers\' margins), sometimes falling below the 300 euro mark. At
the same time, the characteristics are evolving in the right direction.
Screens now range between 9 and 10 inches to facilitate reading comfort,
the keyboard is wider with keys spaced further apart than before, and
the batteries often have 6 cells, compared to 3 previously, to improve
battery life. Finally, we note the growing disaffection of the Linux
operating system. Even if this free software allows you to save 50 euros
compared to Microsoft\'s Windows XP, users prefer the user-friendliness
of a familiar environment. A little too quickly buried by Microsoft, XP
is thus experiencing a second youth compared to Windows Vista, which is
too greedy for these small machines. The future of netbooks nevertheless
appears uncertain. Analysts such as ABI Research or GfK point out the
narrow window of this market segment, stuck between the rise of
smartphones (which look like real computers) and the fall in the price
of notebooks (classic laptops), sometimes below the limit of 400 euros.
Will they be able to resist? Asus provides an element of the answer by
emphasizing the communication specificity of the product (see interview
p. 144), while the analysis firm IDC estimates that the global market
will continue to grow, going from 10 million units this year to 30
million in 2012, particularly in Europe, where consumers perceive the
netbook as a cheap and easy-to-carry spare PC. If you do not want to do
advanced photo editing, video editing, or use creative applications and
even less video games, you may be tempted by one of the new models that
we are offering you. Especially since their aesthetics have nothing to
envy of their big brothers. Sony and Asus have recently decided to
position themselves in the high-end by releasing refined versions
(lacquered shell, crystal inlays, improved performance, etc.). Sony\'s
latest little marvel weighs 638 grams on the scale compared to 1 kilo
for its competitors. Slipped into a handbag or a large pocket, you would
almost forget about it, if it weren\'t for its price: more than 1,000
euros. Also note the upcoming release of a mini Macbook if we are to
believe the rumors on the net. No confirmation for the moment from Apple
but the forecasts of a decline in the market for classic computers for
2009 argue for this scenario. Finally, some will appreciate the decision
of the joint committee, on January 28, not to follow the Senate\'s
proposal to impose the fee for \"all types of terminals\", including
computers. Rather unpleasant, indeed, to have to pay 118 euros per year
for a product that cost less than 300 euros, especially if you don\'t
watch television!

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1229

IBM, SUN MICROSYSTEMS Will SUN MICROSYSTEMS fall into Big Blue\'s hands?
Yesterday, the Wall Street Journal revealed that IBM and Sun had entered
into discussions and that, if the deal was concluded, the acquisition
could be decided as early as this week for a minimum of \$6.5 billion in
cash, a 100% premium to Tuesday\'s closing price. IBM confirmed that it
had emotionally opened the dialogue. As a result, Sun Microsystems
shares jumped 61% to \$8. This would be the largest acquisition in
IBM\'s history. Last year, the latter acquired Canadian publisher Cognos
for \$5 billion. IBM CEO Samuel Palmisano promised last week to be
\"offensive\" in the face of the economic crisis, assuring that the
group would \"continue to invest in research and development, in
strategic acquisitions, in growth initiatives.\" Sun Microsystems
reportedly knocked on several doors before opening IBM\'s. HP, with
which Sun nevertheless concluded a strategic partnership in February,
reportedly declined the offer. Such a transaction would have the
advantage of widening the gap between IBM and HP in the booming server
market thanks to the rise of cloud computing, online storage services.
Yesterday, Cisco, the American telecom equipment giant, added itself to
the list of competitors by announcing that it was entering this market.
IBM and Sun Microsystems do have some things in common, it is true. Both
are developing on the fringes of Microsoft\'s Windows universe. They are
also supporters of open source software. Sun Microsystems in loss On the
other hand, the cultures of the two companies are quite different: on
the one hand, the veteran IBM has 386,558 employees. Big Blue, the
former heavyweight in PCs and servers, has transformed itself into a
group in which services represent the majority of sales. And software
and services now bring in the majority of profits. Opposite, Sun
Microsystems, which grew up in Silicon Valley in the 1980s, has a total
of 33,556 employees. The company, which invented the Java programming
language and the Solaris operating system, cultivates innovation. But
the two high-tech companies are not in the same health. IBM made a
profit of \$16.7 billion in 2008, while Sun only made \$473 million.
During the two quarters of the 2008-2009 financial year, Sun
Microsystems saw its sales fall. The Californian group even reported a
loss of \$1.6 billion in the first quarter.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1230

Free software is becoming increasingly popular in business. It must be
said that in theory, it is more than attractive, particularly with the
promise of a significant reduction in acquisition and usage costs.
Except that in practice, it is not as apparent. Nevertheless: the
current crisis could accelerate its adoption. In any case, this adoption
seems inevitable. Gartner estimates that in three years, no fewer than
nine out of ten companies will integrate at least one free software into
their current activities. However, they risk being faced with technical
problems that could make them regret such a choice, they warn. \"In many
cases, the offer, maintenance and usage costs will remain identical \[to
a proprietary solution\]\", concludes Gartner. It must be said that
there are more and more free software for businesses. And organizations
to offer support to SMEs that adopt them. There are more and more of
them. Infoglobe has noted that its clientele includes more and more
SMEs. Even if, in the end, the savings promised by software advertised
as free are often not there. Zineb Midafi, project manager for
Infoglobe, explains: \"It\'s difficult to quantify the real savings. At
least, it avoids having to pay an annual license, or having to make
forced updates without wanting to.\" Josianne Marsan is a doctoral
student in information technology at HEC Montréal. Her thesis focuses
precisely on free software. She seems to support the warning issued by
Gartner in its study: while the supply of this software is growing,
demand is somewhat reluctant. \"There are questions that come up
often,\" she says. \"Some companies are simply afraid of the unknown,
others of the lack of technical support for this software.\" The weight
of numbers In short, it will not necessarily be the El Dorado promised
by many. But the never-ending crisis seems to favor free software
despite everything. That\'s what Pascale Tardif, an engineer at the
Montreal Computer Research Center (CRIM), a specialist when it comes to
free software, thinks. \"The crisis will lead to a new way of doing
business that could make a big place for free software,\" she says.
Without being a cost-cutting solution that could save a company in
difficulty. It\'s rather the financial fragility of certain giants,
until now perceived as untouchable, that leaves the impression that free
solutions, developed by a community of independent developers, could
prove more sustainable than their proprietary counterparts. \"A year
ago, we thought that General Motors was indestructible,\" illustrates
the engineer. And today, its customers are wondering who will assume the
warranty it offers on all its vehicles if the company were to disappear.
\"What tells us that in five or ten years, a company whose documents
were written in an old version of Word will still be able to access
their content?\" asks Pascale Tardif. Continuing with the automobile
metaphor, she adds: \"Free software is like the parts of an
automobile.\" So you can change specific parts as needed, not the entire
vehicle. \"When software is produced by a strong community of
developers, it is a very high-quality product.\" It must be said that
CRIM is preaching a bit for its own parish. Last week, the Montreal
Centre presented its newest product, an electronic document management
software called Alfresco, which operates completely free of charge. In
doing so, the Montreal organization is getting involved in helping to
correct the lack of support for Quebec SMEs. \"This is something that
CRIM can do,\" admits Pascale Tardif. \"It may not be a real
cost-cutting solution, but it is a smarter way of making software.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1231

The wealth of our economies is based on natural resources that are being
depleted, and the increase in GDP - a political holy grail if ever there
was one - is putting too much pressure on the environment. This
observation is common to two books that have been in bookstores since
January, but the solutions they provide to remedy it differ. For Hervé
Kempf, a journalist at Le Monde, we must get out of capitalism to save
the furniture, the Earth, and those who sit on it, humans. He compares
capitalism to rafflesia, a tropical flower that sucks the energy from
the plant it parasitizes. It suddenly grows up to a meter in diameter,
and dies. If green growth is grafted onto the roots of capitalism, it
cannot help get out of the red. Not from an environmental point of view
in any case. Throughout his reports, Kempf invites us on a terrifying
world tour of the Green New Deal in progress. Green growth is already
producing considerable perverse effects. Namely: nuclear power, which,
with its waste and risks, mortgages the future; industrial wind power
that disfigures the landscapes of France; biofuels that decimate
tropical forests; CO2 sequestration that emits CO2. According to Kempf,
three ideas - erroneous ones - structure the dominant thinking:
technology will solve the problem; energy consumption will continue to
grow and GDP growth will continue; climate change is the only problem -
goodbye to biodiversity in peril and the dangerous degradation of the
ecosystems on which the economy is based. These problems, it is true,
interest neither politicians nor industrialists, because they do not
translate into promises of green income. Steering. Getting out of
capitalism? Might as well bet on a major anthropological change, sneer
the authors of C\'est maintenant! Jean-Marc Jancovici, climate expert,
and Alain Grandjean, economist. \"This is as likely to happen in the
short term as the appearance of a second Moon next week.\" They are
firing broadsides at the Greens, environmentalists, radical activists,
those who gather \"against\" (GMOs, nuclear power, whaling, etc.),
failing to agree on the \"for\" to defend. According to the co-authors,
these activists have understood nothing about capitalism, which is not
defined as \"the domination of all by large multinationals, but only as
the private ownership of the means of production.\" Because of their
experience with large groups, the two X-level cronies propose more
pragmatic solutions, especially those dedicated to the climate
emergency. First and foremost, it is urgent to send the deputies back to
their studies, they write. Once that is done, they will perhaps be able
to debate in depth before voting for superficial Grenelles. The two
authors propose the appointment to all government positions of a
technical advisor on resources and energy who would poke his nose into
all issues, including pensions and diplomacy. Like Kempf, they advocate
the decline of material goods (\"we\'re going to have to get used to the
idea of being happier with less\") and the political courage to make
this understood. But, unlike the journalist, as good polytechnicians,
they celebrate technology (nuclear, CO2 sequestration). They imagine a
world where we will have to move cities to the countryside, because
there will be \"fewer tertiary jobs and more workers in agriculture,
crafts, technical professions\". Energy-intensive residential areas will
be condemned to die. In certain sovereign sectors such as energy,
Jancovici and Grandjean defend regulation so as not to lose control of
investments. In short, deploy nuclear power and build four reactors as
quickly as possible. But their leitmotif is energy taxation. According
to them, we tax work too much and not energy enough. Compost. For Kempf,
the answer is more global, more exciting too. Capitalism is collapsing,
let\'s take advantage of it! Its compost will be used to fertilize
solidarity initiatives, those that make us happy. And to cite the
success of cooperatives, of associative movements, which, on their own,
account for 10% of GDP. He recounts the success of associations, which
directly connect vegetable producers and consumers (Amap), of
carpooling, bartering, free software\... in short, non-financial
exchanges. In this, Kempf\'s book invites us to a broader reflection on
human well-being. Capitalism in its most advanced forms debrainizes
humans, confiscates their speech, frustrates the constantly solicited
consumer, in a word drives them crazy and dehumanizes them.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1232

His name is Hugues, he is known as the skipper of Inderweltsein (\"being
in the world\", a reference to Heidegger) and he is the other star of
this edition of the Vendée Globe. Thirty-six hours after Michel
Desjoyeaux\'s victory, it was the turn of the first virtual navigator to
reach dry land yesterday at 9am. Behind him, more than 320,000
participants in the online game Virtual Regatta. This 31-year-old from
Rennes is also a developer of free software.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1233

Under the title \"How the Google model can help Detroit\", the American
weekly devotes its cover to Jeff Jarvis\' book. In What Would Google
Do?, the essayist imagines how open source and participatory methods
could revive manufacturers. If the latter had consulted their customers
online, they would not have launched cars that go against the trends.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1234

NPA. Three letters, a new acronym for a new beginning. Under the
leadership of its spokesperson, Olivier Besancenot, the Revolutionary
Communist League (LCR) will give birth, on February 6, 7 and 8, to the
New Anti-Capitalist Party (NPA). A party that its leaders want to bring
out of marginality, raise to the level of their leader\'s popularity,
and whose image they intend to transform. The activists are ready for
change: nearly 9,000 of them have made it known that they support this
metamorphosis by taking the card of this new far-left party. Besancenot
and his close guard can savor their success: they have almost reached
\"the party of 10,000\", an old myth of the 1970s. For almost two years,
little by little, the leaders of the \"League\" have been preparing the
transformation of a revolutionary group into a party of struggles and
resistance. It was the day after April 22, 2007 that the starting signal
for change was given by the LCR\'s political bureau. Gathered in their
premises hidden in a dead-end street in Montreuil (Seine-Saint-Denis),
where small, cluttered and filthy offices and the artisanal printing of
Rouge, the LCR\'s weekly, were piled up, the Trotskyist leaders exulted
at the sight of the results obtained in the first round of the
presidential election. Olivier Besancenot had just reached 4.1% of the
vote, crushing all his competitors from the radical left - Marie-George
Buffet (1.93%), José Bové (1.32%), Arlette Laguiller (1.33%), and Gérard
Schivardi (0.34%). In a context where the useful vote had weighed
heavily, the LCR candidate allowed himself the luxury of achieving a
better score than in 2002, by registering 1.5 million votes, or 280,000
more. Olivier Besancenot was then well established in the landscape of
the French left. \"It\'s a great moment,\" sighs François Sabado, one of
the historical leaders of the LCR. He is the one who has coached
\"Olivier\" for eight years, and he knows the hours of work behind this
great result. For him, the proof is there that his champion has imposed
himself to last. It is therefore necessary to build him an organization
in his image: young, anchored in these declassed middle classes,
revolted by inequalities, unable to support Nicolas Sarkozy, with
multiple and varied indignations, from GMOs to advertising, from the
children of illegal immigrants to free software. The old \"League\" may
have recruited new voters during the campaign, but it no longer offers
the appropriate framework for these new revolts. Everything must be
changed: the name, the program, the way it works, the debates, the
leaders, their image. To avoid repeating the mistake of 2002. That year,
Olivier Besancenot, then a young and unknown candidate of the LCR, to
whom Alain Krivine had given way, had run a dynamic campaign and
achieved the feat of attracting 4.25% of the votes in the first round of
the presidential election. The choice of the \"generational break\" had
worked, and even beyond the hopes of the LCR. The new champion of this
movement found himself behind Arlette Laguiller (5.72%) but ahead of
Robert Hue, the candidate of the PCF (3.37%). Already, the \"League\"
had seen these new faces of young employees who identified with the
revolt led by the postman of Neuilly-sur-Seine flock to its meetings.
Already, television and the press had become curious about this newcomer
with his striking wit who suddenly made the other candidates of the
radical left seem outdated. Already, the ranks of the organization
(\"the orga\") had suddenly swelled. But the LCR remained what it had
always been: a group of quasi-professional intellectuals and activists,
with interminable meetings and an outdated Trotskyist doxa. The
newcomers did not stay, the numbers stagnated, between 2,500 and 3,000
members. But the political situation would gradually change between 2002
and 2007. The left, which thought it could see the light at the end of
its tunnel of failures after its good results in the regional elections
of 2004, was torn apart when the debate on the European Constitution
arose in 2005. The radical wing - PCF, LCR - would ally itself in the
\"battle of the no\" with the left of the Greens, the protest socialists
led by Jean-Luc Mélenchon and the left republicans of Jean-Pierre
Chevènement. And after a campaign in which they were quite surprised to
be able to hold joint meetings and speeches, they would, thanks to the
contribution of thousands of alter-globalist and anti-liberal little
hands, swing the result of the referendum on the European Constitution
towards the no. This was the time when the left of the left thought it
was possible to present a common candidate in the presidential election
that followed. The LCR will be the first to dampen this collective
momentum by declaring that it will present its candidate, Besancenot.
Because he is \"the best\" to capture the \"no\" electorate. Accusations
of \"division\" or \"betrayal\" will do nothing. The LCR has its
champion and intends to impose him despite the competition. Its
activists are the first to have sensed that the reasonable speeches of
the PS no longer work among the people of the left. With the success of
the alter-globalization movements, and, soon, the crisis of capitalism,
utopia is back. And Besancenot will not let anyone steal this
opportunity from him. After his consecration in the 2007 presidential
election, the young spokesperson of the LCR wants to push his advantage
and give his organization a clean sweep. To put an end to his \"united
front\" line which made him constantly seek alliances against the right
and form electoral agreements with sometimes Lutte Ouvrière (LO), the
Alternatifs or other structures too \"vague\" in his eyes. Olivier
Besancenot never believed in it, and no longer wants to deal with this
\"old left\". He who had started out in a minority tendency reproaching
the leadership of the LCR for not being revolutionary enough is
convinced that after years of lean cows and marginal scores, his time
and that of his comrades has come. On condition that he changes tactics
and asserts himself. He will act quickly. In August 2007, the day the
LCR university opened, the activists were stunned to discover the
headline on the front page of Le Parisien: \"Besancenot wants to abolish
the LCR.\" He calmed things down by saying that this was not what he had
said, but the message had got through. The next day, at a meeting, he
clarified his thinking: \"Representing ourselves alone is the key.\" It
was therefore necessary to create a new party, because \"you can\'t make
something new out of something old.\" For him, the LCR must break with
its tactical choices always linked to what the PS says or what the PCF
does. He never stops repeating his credo to his comrades: \"It is time
to turn the page on the old workers\' movement to write a new blank
page\", and to regroup \"all these heroes of everyday life who no longer
want to let themselves be pushed around\". According to him, it is
urgent: we are on the eve of \"a new May 68\", where the accumulated
anger and the strikes that multiply can \"set the plain on fire\". The
new line, more leftist, makes the older ones wince, but it pleases the
young people internally. The management has understood that Besancenot
wants to accelerate. After having trained him, his mentors watch, a
little fascinated, as their protégé gains thickness and leaves his mark.
They line up behind him, knowing that he will never be like them,
completely devoted to \"the organization\". \"It is out of the question
that the League will do to me what LO did to Arlette,\" he has long
warned. He has never stopped showing his difference with his comrade
Krivine. No question of \"signing for twenty years\" as a candidate. He
claims his friendships, even if they raise eyebrows, like when he
appears with Joey Starr, whose speech is not always feminist. He also
wants to preserve his football matches, his party nights and his little
family. We do not touch his \"intimate part\". Besancenot does not only
change the style or the leadership practices of the \"League\". He also
shakes up the references and political imagery. It is now Che Guevara
that he regularly invokes as his hero, or even the libertarian
tradition. He forgets Trotsky, who is decidedly too old fashioned. And
after L\'Internationale, it is often his rapper \"buddies\" that we hear
at the end of his meetings. He has established his \"prolo\" image, a
young employee earning 1,100 euros per month. This ability to resemble
his voters is his asset: \"A precious asset in a society undermined by
the crisis of legitimacy of political personnel\", analyzes Denis
Pingaud in his book L\'Effet Besancenot (Seuil, 2008). The young leader
is therefore working on his image as a far-left poulbot with direct
language, who wants to make politics accessible. Speeches and television
broadcasts are preceded by meticulous \"training\". Sheets are regularly
written for him so that he can come up with the right figures, which say
better than a speech the difficulties encountered by \"ordinary
people\". His \"media plan\" is resolutely oriented towards the general
public. Regular interviews with Le Parisien, 20 Minutes or RMC Infos,
appearances on the satirical show \"Groland\" on Canal+, and even on
Michel Drucker\'s \"Vivement dimanche\" on France 2, broadcast on the
day Arlette Laguiller gave her last speech at the Lutte Ouvrière
festival. Workers, he proclaims, need \"a party that will defend them to
the end\". And he \"doesn\'t give up\", being \"the only one who is
totally independent\", viscerally opposed to Nicolas Sarkozy, but also
to the PS. The recipe works. The municipal elections of March 2008 saw
the LCR lists establish themselves in communist lands and play with the
nerves of the socialists, by refusing to call for a vote for the left in
the second round. Besancenot has excellent results in opinion polls,
even ahead of the PS leaders. The French find him \"likeable\", \"close
to the people\", \"courageous\", \"honest\". In September 2008, a year
and a half after the presidential election, if they had to vote again,
13% of those polled would vote for him (Opinion Way poll of September 17
and 18). No more! On the activist side, the success is undeniable. Since
the LCR launched committees to launch a new party, the meeting rooms
have been full. \"We chose to surpass ourselves and we succeeded,\"
proclaims Pierre-François Grond, Olivier Besancenot\'s right-hand man.
Young private sector employees, civil servants, precarious workers,
intermittent workers or the unemployed, the public is varied. Alongside
a few seasoned activists in the anti-globalization movement or unionism,
the vast majority are \"first-time activists\", as Florence Johsua, a
doctoral student at Cevipof, calls them. A more working-class, younger
and angrier left: \"They are arriving with their raw revolt,\" she
notes. They are impatient members who want to be on all fronts, hate the
PS which \"betrayed\" and expect everything from the NPA and
\"Olivier.\" Perhaps too much. \"Olivier has stamped his way of seeing
things, at a forced pace, without taking the time to discuss the
political contours of the NPA, which are limited to announcing a desire
for a \"break.\" All this at the cost of a certain depoliticization,\"
underlines Christian Picquet, from the ranks of the minority, at the
LCR. The criticism does not shake the faith of Besancenot\'s friends.
They don\'t care! The 9,000 membership cards announced are there. The
milestone of the \"great party\" has been reached. p

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1235

64 GIGAS UNDER THE HOOD The new EMTEC USB keys are now similar to real
external hard drives. With storage capacities increased to 32 GB and
even 64 GB, the S400 Em-Desk range offers a real pocket solution for
transporting and archiving personal data. As a bonus, these keys include
an open source software suite to have practical and office tools at your
disposal at all times: VLC (video file playback), Ppen Office (word
processing, spreadsheet, etc.), Mozilla Firefox and Mozilla Thunderbird
(Internet and email), and fifteen other small utilities. Enough to work
and have fun anywhere without leaving any traces on a third-party
computer. EMTEC, S400 Em-Desk: 32 GB at 99 euros, 64 GB at 149 euros.
Also available in 4GB and 16GB versions. OLD TITLES ARE DOING WELL ON
CONSOLES Despite the avalanche of games released before Christmas, older
titles continue to hold the upper hand at the start of 2009. According
to the ranking of the best-selling video games for the second week of
January, published by GFK, Wii Fit and Wii Play still occupy the first
two places. Next up are The Rabbids Show, Guitar Hero: Legends of Rock
and Call of Duty: World at War, three games released just before the
holidays that have therefore failed to dethrone Nintendo\'s two older
hits. On the PC side, the premium on new releases still works: Gran
Theft Auto IV and World of Warcraft: Wrath of the Lich King have indeed
risen to the top of the best-selling titles.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1236

Washington - The online encyclopedia Wikipedia announced this week that
it has successfully raised \$6 million in donations to keep it running
for the current fiscal year. Wikipedia founder Jimmy Wales said 125,000
people responded to a call for donations launched on July 1, raising \$4
million. \"In addition, we have received significant donations and
support for the foundation, totaling \$2 million,\" he added in a letter
of thanks published on the website of the nonprofit Wikimedia
Foundation, of which he is honorary chairman and which manages the
online encyclopedia. \"The addition of these funds will cover our
expenses for the current fiscal year, which ends June 30, 2009,\" Wales
said. The money raised will be used to fund \"day-to-day operations,\"
he said, such as purchasing bandwidth and paying the salaries of the 23
staff members, while also \"continuing to develop and improve the free
software that is the lifeblood of all Wikimedia projects.\" Beyond the
\$6 million earmarked for the encyclopedia, additional donations will be
placed in a \"contingency fund, which will help us balance costs beyond
the current fiscal year,\" Wales said. \"Your continued support will
also help us stay on our feet if economic conditions continue to
deteriorate,\" he said. Wales said 150,000 volunteers have contributed
nearly 11 million articles in 265 languages to Wikipedia over the past
eight years. \"More than 275 million people visit our site each month
for free, ad-free information,\" he said.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1237

The human species ended up wondering, in the 20th century, if it was not
working towards its own extinction. Nuclear war, climate, pollution,
depletion of resources, explosion of injustices\... In the end, it
doesn\'t matter what apocalypse is announced to us, the main thing is to
avoid it. Our species being responsible for its own destiny, this
salvation can only come through awareness and voluntary action. And this
is where, perhaps, we are making a flagrant error. Are we not entrusting
those who led us here\... with the task of getting us out of it? The
confusion is enormous, it consists of confusing the problem and its
solution. Are we not trying to save\... the mode of operation that is
leading us to our loss? The truly irresponsible species, the one whose
behavior is unsustainable, is perhaps not the human species as a whole,
but a small fraction of it, the elite of knowledge and power that
crisscrosses the planet in long-haul planes, from conference to
conference in air-conditioned palaces, and has been producing reports,
grand principles, new institutions, new taxes and other grenelleries for
decades. Let us dare to hypothesize: if we are in the most total
confusion, it is because we have allowed this elite to intellectually
\"construct\" the new values (sustainable, ethical, responsible,
ecological, equitable\...) and that we have allowed an unacceptable
dissociation to set in between \"the world of discourse and
representation\", on the one hand, and \"the world of action and
reality\", on the other. It is our regime of knowledge and power that
must be modified, if we want to put back into operation the missing cogs
between declared values and accomplished actions. What can we do? No
longer \"delegating\" problems, dealing with them at the micropolitical
level, which has now become the relevant level of politics. The major
cultural success of our time, the Internet, is not due to any
administration or company. In the value system of new technologies,
everything demonstrates the unstoppable power of emerging collectives:
the micro-actions of anonymous actors have produced the explosion of
microcomputing, \"free\" software (open source), Wikipedia, the pooling
of cultural goods by putting them online or Peer to Peer. The Reporters
of Hope report exactly the same observation: the micro-actions of small
communities, or even individuals, transform the world of reality and not
that of discourse. They do not aim to \"solve global problems\", as
large institutions do. They aim to dig a well, serve a meal, help with
school homework, change a local or even individual way of cultivating,
eating, moving, recycling\... Micro-actions instead of big speeches. One
might think that \"one does not prevent the other\", but that is our
mistake, that is where we confuse problems and solutions. Because we
must take into account the \"counterproductive\" effect of grand
speeches. Today, the most astute way of not dealing with a problem is no
longer to deny it, it is to recognize it and pretend that we are dealing
with it, that we are taking care of it. While in reality, we are taking
care to permanently bog it down in bureaucracy and propaganda. \"Your
concern is ours, it is at the heart of the mission of our company, of
our government, we devote resources to it, all our energy, a large
ministry\...\" The elite that is trying to save the planet, too often,
is trying above all to save the endangered species that it itself is.
This is not only misleading, it is counterproductive. How can we oppose
it? Not by being \"against\", but by being \"elsewhere\". Through
micro-actions. Here and now, in one\'s street, in one\'s house, in
one\'s office or in one\'s class, in one\'s way of living and especially
of thinking. Latest published work: Homo sapiens technologicus, le
Pommier 2008.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1238

In times of financial and economic crisis such as the economic world is
experiencing these months, governments and businesses could find an
interest in free and \"Open Source\" software not only because of the
acquisition and technical support costs, but also because of the message
that would be sent to large companies that periodically force them to
upgrade their operating systems and office suites. This is what Mr.
Roger Laberge, president of Infoglobe and ardent defender of free
software in the world of computing, maintains. \"The Quebec and Canadian
governments would miss an excellent opportunity to position themselves
against the giants by imposing their choices,\" he says in an interview.
\"European governments and several South American countries have decided
to take the turn towards free software so as to no longer be subject to
the decisions of software giants like Microsoft.\" He gives the example
of an SME that must upgrade 300 computers with a new operating system
and a new office suite because the software producer can no longer
support users. The company will have to spend tens of thousands of
dollars at a time that may not be convenient for it. Some software is
free of charge, but will require training that, according to Mr.
Laberge, will be less expensive than with a commercial office suite.
\"And that translates into jobs here in local companies instead of
giving their money to an American company or a multinational that will
not necessarily reinvest its profits in Quebec or Canada,\" he
continues. \"With Linux operating systems, it is less expensive for
technical support, and the company can train its own technicians, have
the expertise and use the expertise of user groups. The only argument
left to large commercial developers is accountability if the system
crashes.\" In the world of free software, everyone affirms that Linux
operating systems, regardless of their origin (Red Hat, Ubuntu, Suze and
others), are stable, secure and as efficient as commercial systems while
being less expensive. Moreover, for Ubuntu versions, international
technical support is provided by the Montreal-based company Canonical.
Furthermore, computer manufacturers offer the choice of equipping the
device with the operating system of their choice: Linux or Windows for
example. In the Web universe, servers are mostly equipped with the Linux
system. This is the case for more than 60% of servers. In the case of
the 500 largest companies, the percentage climbs to 85 and is constantly
increasing (www.top500.org). Mr. Laberge gives the example of the Quebec
Ministry of Economic Development (MDEIE) which has adopted TYPO 3
technology for its Web servers. He says that the move to free or
open-source software does not mean job losses, but rather the creation
of local skills. \"With free software, we can do more at a lower cost
with limited resources,\" he concludes. ytherrien@lesoleil.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1239

At the end of October, an intrepid ibex landed on thousands of screens.
It\'s version 8.10 of the Linux distribution Ubuntu, Intrepid Ibex in
the original version. Huh? But why does Libération start talking about
this kind of obscure stuff that only concerns a handful of bearded
computer scientists? Probably because this preconceived idea no longer
has any reason to exist. Linux, which is an operating system in the same
way as Microsoft Windows and Apple OS X, is turning towards the general
public and is gradually becoming very accessible. The story of a
transition that is not so complicated. D - 17. Sixteen years. I have
been using Windows for sixteen years. At least since my first PC, in
1992, which ran on Windows 3.11. Why should it be any different for this
new laptop? Because today, we have a choice. We can just ask ourselves
which system we are going to use. Just ask ourselves the question. Since
this laptop is not intended to run video games, a quick review of the
applications is in order. Internet? I use Firefox. Office? It\'s Open
Office. Video? A little program called VLC, etc. They run on Windows,
but they are free software. And they naturally run on Linux, the free
system par excellence. And because it is free, Linux is free. The answer
therefore seems obvious. My laptop will therefore run Ubuntu, the
version (we call it a \"distribution\") of Linux that is most accessible
to the neophyte. D-Day. I receive (finally!) the beast. I turn it on. As
a welcome, no \"Windows\", but a nice \"Ubuntu\". Already, it seems
strange. In the introduction, it just asks me to choose a username and
password. Three clicks later, I discover the interface. Simple,
functional. An \"applications\" menu to access the programs. A
\"shortcut\" menu that opens the file explorer with direct links to
\"photos\", \"video\", \"music\" directories. My Wi-Fi network is
detected. I enter the security key, and hey presto, it\'s connected.
Almost too simple. D + 1. That\'s not all, but to use a computer for
anything other than a side lamp, you need software. A bare Windows,
apart from playing Minesweeper, is not much use. The very principle of
the distribution, which is a sort of compilation of basic software,
changes everything. Each Linux distribution (the others are called
Debian, Mandriva or Fedora) therefore comes with its own selection. For
Ubuntu, we therefore find, from the first start-up, Firefox, OpenOffice,
a music software, another for video, a photo manager, etc. And a
Minesweeper! D + 3. Linux is serious, it\'s austere, it\'s not a joke.
At least, that\'s what I was telling myself. But now, for a few hours,
I\'ve been having fun making windows wiggle like Flambys, watching them
burn when I close them, all in an overload of crazy visual effects.
I\'ll turn that off: funny but cumbersome. There\'s even a terrible
thing called \"the cube\". A well-placed mouse click, and zwing, the
workspace goes into 3D. And then you can change desktops. It\'s a bit
like the thing that every Linux user who wants to impress the gallery
shows. But it works\... D + 7. Not everything is rosy in Linux.
Sometimes, let\'s admit it, we don\'t really know how to do it. For
normal people, who weren\'t born with a keyboard in their hands, the
solution is to call for help from the friend-who-knows-what-it-is. It\'s
almost a must to have the friend-who-knows-what-it-is in your
relationships. But it\'s not always easy under Windows, so under
Linux\... With Ubuntu, there\'s better: it\'s the
community-who-knows-what-it-is. You can find it for example on
Ubuntu-fr.org. There, the answer to the question you\'re asking is
usually already there. You look in the documentation and if the file
exists, you know that your problem is almost solved. Otherwise, you go
to the forums. And there, it\'s crazy the number of people who have
already had the same problem! And several good Samaritans will have
explained how to get out of it. You can also read Simple comme Ubuntu, a
book that takes beginners by the hand. Free download on Framabook.org
(15 euros in paper version). D + 135. More than four months under Linux
and no desire to go back. I use my laptop daily without any problem. The
latest version of Ubuntu, Intrepid Ibex, was released at the end of
October, and I updated my system automatically in a few clicks. It\'s
still impressive. This weekend, at the Cité des sciences et de
l\'industrie, in Paris, the Ubuntu Party is being held. Lots of friendly
experts will be there to help newbies find their way around. Ideal for a
first encounter with this friendly ibex. On www.ecrans.fr/ubuntu, the
full version of this logbook.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1240

Make Art Festival Maison de l\'architecture 1, rue de la Tranchée,
Poitiers (Vienne) from November 25 to 30. Info:
http://makeart.goto10.org This week, the third edition of Make Art is
coming to Poitiers with an invitation \"to explore the depths of real
and virtual machines, as well as the hidden activity of operating
systems.\" Organized by the international collective goto10, the
festival is dedicated to the use of free and open source tools and
software - or Floss - in programming and digital art. It offers a cycle
of presentations, concerts, performances and screenings. The Maison de
l\'Architecture will host a group of works between networks and
machines, including LevelHead, by Julian Oliver (from the Selectparks
site): an augmented reality game, in cubes, whose demonstration video
recently made the rounds of the Web. You can also get lost in the
labyrinth of pages m/e/m/e 2.0, by Danja Vassiliev; listen to the noise
of the RAM of a family of six obsolete computers in Sei Personaggi in
Cerca d\'Autore, by Valentina Vuksic; then let yourself be carried away
by the metaphysical questions of the software work exist.pl, by Pall
Thayer, or attend Al Jazari, a live-coding musical performance by Dave
Griffiths, who will be back on Saturday evening for a session with his
comrades from the Toplap collective. As for conferences, note that of
Benjamin Jean (co-founder of Veni, Vidi, Libri) on the legislation on
copyright and the issues of publishing works under a free license. A
user-guide intervention intended for artists, in order to understand the
different existing licenses.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1241

New York - The American computer group Sun Microsystems announced
yesterday the elimination of 15% to 18% of its global workforce, or
5,000 to 6,000 positions, to \"adapt to the global economic climate\".
This restructuring, estimated to cost \$500 to \$600 million over the
next 12 months, should also allow Sun Microsystems to reorganize its
software activity to \"accelerate the advent of open source
innovations\".

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1242

NEW YORK - The American computer group Sun Microsystems announced
yesterday the elimination of 15% to 18% of its global workforce, or
5,000 to 6,000 positions, to \"adapt to the global economic climate\".
At the same time, media reports are suggesting massive layoffs at two
major banks: Royal Bank of Scotia and Citigroup. The restructuring of
Sun Microsystems, estimated to cost \$500 million to \$600 million over
the next 12 months, should also allow the company to reorganize its
software activity to \"accelerate the advent of open source
innovations\". In the long term, the manufacturer of servers and
software, designer of the Java and Solaris operating systems, expects
that its restructuring will allow it to save \$700 million to \$800
million per year. The group based in Santa Clara, California, also
announced yesterday the immediate departure of the head of its software
activity, Rich Green. One thousand two hundred employees have already
been notified of their layoffs in the United States and Canada since
July, with additional layoffs planned in the Europe/Middle East/Africa,
Asia/Pacific and Latin America regions. The company is expected to have
27,000 to 28,000 employees over the long term. The announcement comes
two weeks after the company released results that showed a quarterly net
loss of \$1.66 billion, compared with a net income of \$89 million in
the same period last year, and a 7.1% decline in revenue (USD 2.9
billion). Sun Microsystems shares have lost nearly 80% of their value in
a year. Yesterday, the stock fell 4 cents to \$4.12, holding up better
than other Nasdaq stocks. Citigroup US bank Citigroup is cutting at
least 10,000 more jobs in an attempt to restore profitability, the Wall
Street Journal reported yesterday. \"Starting this week, Citigroup is
distributing layoff notices to at least 10,000 employees in its
investment banking business and other divisions around the world,\" the
business daily reported, citing sources familiar with the matter. Chief
Executive \"Vikram Pandit and his deputies have asked group officials to
cut employee compensation budgets by at least 25 percent,\" the American
daily added, adding that the total number of employees laid off could be
reduced if high-paying positions are eliminated. The Wall Street Journal
reported that Citigroup has already cut about 23,000 jobs over the past
four quarters, reducing its total workforce to 352,000 at the end of
September. The cuts could be even more severe, with Citigroup aiming to
reduce its workforce to about 290,000 by next year, one of the people
told the WSJ. The third quarter marked a fourth straight quarter of
losses for Citigroup, with a net loss of \$2.8 billion. RBS Meanwhile,
Royal Bank of Scotland (RBS) is cutting about 3,000 jobs worldwide in
the coming weeks as it seeks to cut costs amid the financial crisis,
British media reported yesterday. RBS, which has asked the British
government for 20 billion pounds in aid to weather the credit crunch, is
cutting jobs in banking and financial markets, according to the BBC,
which did not provide its sources. Royal Bank of Scotland spokeswoman
Linda Harper said the bank would not confirm the job cuts. \"We
constantly review our operating model to ensure it is fit for market
conditions, and we act accordingly,\" it said in a statement. RBS
employs 170,000 people worldwide.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1243

The Firefox web browser, the Eee PC, but also ADSL boxes, mobiles\...
\"Free software is now everywhere, many people use it without knowing
it\", summarizes Benoît Sibaud, president of April, the association for
the promotion and defense of free software (april.org). In September, it
received the special prize from the jury of the lutèces d\'or which
rewards the best projects and actions in the field of free software in
France and Europe. An important recognition for the work accomplished
over the past twelve years by the three permanent staff and hundreds of
volunteers to raise awareness among individuals, associations, companies
and communities around free software. In the spirit of this, April is
today launching a major membership campaign. Why go free? The best
reason is freedom. It is a philosophical and ethical issue. There may be
reasons related to cost, security, ecology, etc. but it is above all a
question of freedom. As Benjamin Franklin said: \"Those who are ready to
sacrifice essential freedom to purchase fleeting security deserve
neither.\" These are also the notions of sharing and transparency \[by
definition, free software is provided with its source code, the use,
distribution and modification of which are authorized, editor\'s note\].
Why this membership campaign? We already did one in 2007, at the time we
had 400 members. Today, there are 2,500 of us, including more than 100
companies (Sun, Thales, etc.), 80 associations and two communities
(including the Ile-de-France region and the city of
Pierrefitte-sur-Seine) and we hope to reach 5,000 by the next general
meeting in February. The objective is greater representativeness and
legitimacy of our action. This is achieved through the number and
diversity of members, both individuals (parity, age mix, etc.) and legal
entities with associations and companies with various activities.
Membership is also the most stable way to ensure our funding and
independence. What are your main actions today? The range of subjects is
very broad. We work a lot to defend free software on issues such as
software patents, DRM, interoperability, standardization of formats or
tied sales. But we also continue promotional work with companies (White
Paper on Free Software Economic Models), associations (Free Association
Project), and the general public (Free Software Party, etc.). For
example, people are not aware that the Internet runs on free software.
From its very structure to the ADSL box, it is free software. Free
formats are winning. They will become the majority. There is no doubt.
Macromedia (Flash, etc.) will one day give up. Even Microsoft is
changing its position. The only question is when.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1244

Freelance journalists very often need free software and utilities to do
their job better. And those who work for a company can always do it at
home and thus enrich their work and research methods. Open Office
Microsoft\'s Office suite, which includes Word, Excel and Power-Point,
is the best-selling in the world. It is so popular that it has long been
a standard and it is hard to imagine a computer without it. The problem
is that the said suite costs more than \$150 in its minimum version. At
this price, the alternatives are tempting. The best known and recognized
of these alternatives is undoubtedly Open Office, a suite in all
respects comparable which, as its name indicates, finds its roots in the
world of free software, which means that anyone can have access to the
source code of each of its components and adapt them. As a result, Open
Office is available not only for all platforms (Windows, Mac OS X,
Linux), but also in several languages, including French. Like its paid
rival, Open Office offers a word processing program (Writer), a
spreadsheet program (Calc) and a presentation program (Impress). It even
adds a drawing program (Draw) and a database program (Base), two
functions that are either not available or only offered on more
expensive versions of the Microsoft suite. Microsoft Office regulars
will easily find their bearings and, importantly, will be able to import
their old documents into Open Office. Conversely, Pulitzer Prize
candidates, who write in Open Office, will be able to send it to any
publication using the Microsoft suite. Open Office is also part of the
long list of software with which the popular proofreader Antidote is
compatible. It should be noted that although it is compatible with Mac
computers, Mac users should instead turn to NeoOffice, a version of Open
Office that is more optimized for this platform. GIMP If the Microsoft
Office bill made you wince, that of Photoshop, which exceeds \$400 for
the full version, can literally make you cry. Fortunately, there is
still a free alternative that is just as powerful, at least for the
average user. We say \"average user\", but we must understand that
Photoshop is a professional software that was never really designed to
be used by Joe the plumber. This is even more true for Gimp, whose
interface is a little more complex than that of Photoshop, even if it is
very inspired by it. This is because Gimp was first designed for Linux
and its adaptation to Windows or Mac OS X requires the prior
installation of another software to bridge the gap. In the end, the
product is therefore very useful and its possibilities are almost as
extensive as Photoshop, which is saying something, but the seams are
still a little visible, which can become frustrating. Your own newsfeed
For a few years now, wherever you browse the Internet, you come across
the letters \"RSS\" without knowing what it eats in winter.
Coincidentally, for a few years now you have also been asking yourself:
\"But how do other journalists manage to be aware of everything that is
happening on hundreds of specialized sites and blogs at the same time?
They don\'t visit them all one by one every hour?\" Since all
coincidences are suspect (see Finding a news story 101, rule #1), this
one is no exception. Thanks to software known as RSS aggregators, it is
possible to create your own personalized, electronic and much less noisy
version of the good old newsfeed. The vast majority of blogs and news
sites publish \"RSS feeds\" gathering their latest entries, sometimes in
full or sometimes in simple summaries. Each time a change is made to the
blog or site, the RSS feed is updated. An RSS aggregator is therefore a
software that periodically checks, at the desired frequency, the
different RSS feeds to which you have chosen to subscribe and that
notifies you of updates. You can therefore consult, within the same
window, the latest news from dozens or even hundreds of sites that
interest you. There are many choices in this category but two software
programs produced by the same company, one on Windows and the other on
Mac, nevertheless stand out: FeedDemon (Windows) and NetNewsWire (Mac).
These two programs also have the advantage of being able to synchronize
with the site of their publisher, NewsGator, thus allowing you to
consult \"your\" news via the Web, in case you are outside and deprived
of your own computer. Audacity Increasingly, journalists must go beyond
their main field of expertise to deliver reports containing both text
and photos, but also sound and perhaps even video. Audacity can
certainly help any journalist struggling with audio requests. Radio
professionals would probably balk that it\'s not comprehensive enough,
but it offers the basic functions they need: record, cut out the extras,
tweak the sound quality a bit, and then save in a popular format. It
works with most of them, including MP3s, and it\'s available for free on
both Windows and Mac OS X. Its only downside is a slight stability
issue. Nothing too worrisome, but save regularly. JEAN-FRANÇOIS CODÈRE
Journalist at the Journal de Montréal

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1245

It\'s a bit like those games where you see the punishment of game over
looming and where, in extremis, you gain an extra life. By announcing
that its valiant but old PlayStation 2 (barely eight years old, an
eternity on the frivolous scale of video games) was now becoming a
platform open to all game developers who want it, Sony has given its
queen console a serious chance to extend an already sparkling career.
\"You no longer have to submit your game to Sony for approval of the
content,\" said George Bain, head of Sony\'s relations with game
designers, thus breaking with a dominant economic model that was long
considered the most significant obstacle to creative freedom. The news
is all the more important since the PS2 is currently the best-selling
home console in the world. With its 130 million units installed, it
continues to represent a significant source of income for game
publishers who continue to trust it. In this regard, it will be very
interesting to compare the sales of a title as strategic as PES 09 in
its PS2 version and in its next-gen versions, Konami having had the
great wisdom not to neglect the \"old\" format, which is still very
often the only one owned by teenagers. The other crucial and joyful
implication of this news is that an \"open source\" PS2 will facilitate
access for independent and penniless studios, particularly in so-called
emerging economies, where inexpensive development can make all the
difference. George Bain himself cited the example of India and Russia,
where several projects intended for local markets were about to hatch.
The rumor of Brazilian projects or those from former Eastern countries
is also in full swing. We still hope that this \"local\" dimension will
not be too restrictive and that the distribution of imports will follow.
To date, it is estimated that nearly 1.5 billion PS2 discs have been
sold around the world. With this second wind brought to a console a
little too quickly judged \"at the end of its life\", these extravagant
figures could quickly be outdated. But the most important thing is not
in the volume that this revival will perhaps bring: it is in the kind of
panache that consists of leaving the landscape, since it is necessary
sooner or later, by the top: by delivering oneself to all and in style.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1246

Last June, the International Organization of La Francophonie invited
three hundred experts and teachers to Tunis to reflect on the use of new
technologies in the context of education and knowledge sharing between
French-speaking countries. A meeting rich in discoveries that allowed us
to discover the progress of certain Maghreb countries in online
education and, above all, a desire to share the knowledge of the
Francophonie. But this reflection, although very important, brings up
another equally essential one, that of the importance of new
technologies for the development, promotion and even the future of the
Francophonie on our planet. In a context where the organization wants to
make the Francophonie more popular, give more visibility to its actions
and to the French-speaking resources available in the world, the
Internet is becoming an essential tool for new French-speaking
initiatives. On this subject, the administrator of the OIF, Clément
Duhaime, recently said that the Francophonie had to be popular, and that
this grassroots Francophonie would go through the Internet to reach
young Francophones in particular, who in the North as in the South, are
the most connected Francophones. And as he also suggested, the Internet
could also compensate for the lack of visibility that the organization
obtains in the countries of the North. Because as the Director of the
Institute of Digital Francophonie of the International Organization of
the Francophonie, Pietro Sicuro, reported, if each Francophonie project
is widely covered in the Francophone press of the South, this is not the
case in the North. At least, not as much as he had hoped. This is why,
in the months and years to come, Francophone initiatives should increase
on the Web. Here, we\'re talking about a portal for the French-speaking
Network of National Digital Libraries, over there, we\'ll talk about an
education hub to list French-language training available online, and
then, why not a Facebook for the Francophonie. The importance of TV5
However, if we seem to be taking a greater interest in digital
technology these days, we must not forget that the genesis of the use of
technologies by the International Organization of the Francophonie was
the creation of TV5. Since then, the organization has been able to take
the Internet turn and is working on many fronts to ensure the interests
of Francophones. For example, few people know that the OIF was involved
in Nicholas Negroponte\'s OLPC project. The Francophone organization
wanted to ensure from the start that emerging Francophone countries
would have the right to these small computers for children and that this
tool would be used to communicate in French rather than assimilate them
to the English language. This is how we can see the delivery of the very
first computers of the OLPC project in Haiti as a victory for the OIF.
But Negroponte\'s initiative is only a recent initiative. As early as
1997, the International Organization of the Francophonie was already
beginning to promote free software to help states and citizens looking
for new tools for learning, communication and administration. The OIF
was the first major international organization to support free software.
At the time, the Secretary General of the OIF, Abdou Diouf, said when
speaking about the Francophonie in relation to free software and the
Internet: \"It is legitimate that it wants to go further today in its
reflection and action in an area that affects a fundamental human right
and that is an accelerator of progress on the path to democracy,
development and peace.\" The digital Francophonie This is what brings us
today to talk about the digital Francophonie. In an interview, Pietro
Securo, Director of the Institute of Digital Francophonie, explains how
it is now possible to experience the Francophonie through various
digital devices. He explains this notion of digital Francophonie as
being \"Another way of living, but above all, a way of living equal to
others. When we have access to the devices, we are at the same level as
the Americans, the Chinese.\" He adds: \"We can use all the potential of
digital tools to both work together and also share our sensibilities.
And that is the objective of the Francophonie, it is several States that
have decided to work together, but each according to their own
singularity. And digital is a wonderful tool because it allows us to do
things together through its network dynamics.\" When asked whether we
are creating a Francophonie 2.0 with the use of digital technology,
Pietro Securo answers: \"For about two years, we have been talking about
a new Francophonie and, through digital technology, we are reaching
young people and re-engaging people who were not used to being
interested in the Francophonie.\" This is an important step when you
consider that 50% of the member states of the Francophonie have a
predominantly young population. And he concludes by saying: \"We are no
longer in a dynamic of North-South cooperation, but rather in a true
multipolar Francophone cooperation where, regardless of the country of
origin, all skills are equal.\" \*\*\* Bruno Guglielminetti is a
producer and new technology columnist at Radio-Canada. He is also the
editor of Carnet techno (www.radio-canada.ca/techno).

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1247

PRESS Le Monde has entered into exclusive negotiations with
international publisher Phaidon for the sale of Editions de l\'Etoile
(Cahiers du cinéma). \"Phaidon has demonstrated its ability to
simultaneously respect an editorial heritage and promote demanding
content, to manage a content business and support its development over
the long term,\" according to Le Monde, which hopes to finalize the
transaction in November. TV WITHOUT ADS The proposal for a moratorium on
the removal of advertising on France Télévisions has fizzled out. The
idea was put forward on Sunday evening by Edouard Balladur to finance
the RSA. The President of the Republic confirmed \"that he intended for
the reform to be carried out successfully, across the entire system, by
the end of the year,\" declared yesterday the leader of the UMP
deputies, Jean-François Copé. \"It is not because there is a crisis that
we should interrupt everything that is undertaken in terms of reform,\"
added the Minister of Communication Christine Albanel, on France Info,
specifying that the bill will be passed in the Council of Ministers \"on
October 22\". For François Hollande, first secretary of the PS, a
moratorium is a \"necessity\". SERIES The Nanterre court declared
inadmissible the request of about sixty people bearing the name Bougon.
The association, which requested that the homonymous series of M6 not be
broadcast before its title and the names of its characters were changed,
had to appeal. ESTATES GENERAL The online newspaper Mediapart published
yesterday an \"open letter to the States General\" of the press,
launched by Nicolas Sarkozy on October 2. The president and editorial
director of the site, Edwy Plenel and François Bonnet, are calling on
the entire profession \"to invite them to choose another path, by
imposing genuine States General of the press, organized by the
profession itself, with deliberative assemblies, elected delegates,
grievances collected, according to an authentic democratic procedure,
that is to say public.\" The States General \"must not ignore the
question of freedom of the press,\" believes Reporters Without Borders
(RSF). Free Software The free office suite OpenOffice.org is releasing
its version 3.0 today. Launched in 2002, the OpenOffice.org project has
established itself over time as one of the most credible alternatives to
the quasi-monopoly of Microsoft Office. Alongside Firefox,
OpenOffice.org is currently one of the major projects in the world of
free software. The last major version (2.0) was released in October
2005.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1248

Interpolar Art Maison européenne de la photographie, 5-7, rue de Fourcy,
75004. Until October 12. Conference "Art in Antarctica" today from 5
p.m. to 7 p.m. Info.: www.art-outsiders.com and www.laboratoryplanet.org
"Present from the first polar expeditions, artists have been one of the
vectors of the imagination of these "extremities" of the Earth and their
works have nourished the sublime and romanticism," writes Annick
Bureaud, media theorist and art critic, who proposes "Art in
Antarctica," a series of conferences as part of \@rt outsiders at the
Maison européenne de la photographie (MEP). An attempt to venture beyond
the clichés of extreme adventurers, immaculate expanses with deadly
beauty, and emperor penguins. Migrants. In the wake of the International
Polar Year (2007-2008), many artists have traveled the poles, such as
Andrea Polli, who seeks to convey climate change in his soundscapes of
Antarctica, an ice desert threatened by global warming. Lucy and Jorge
Orta have set up a utopian village there, the ultimate refuge for
migrants. A symbolic choice, since Antarctica is the last continent that
belongs to no one, where only science has the right to exist. \"Creating
in or about Antarctica is as much a political act as an artistic one,\"
notes Annick Bureaud. More than ever, the white continent is in peril.
The site of research involving all scientific disciplines (climatology,
space, biology, etc.) and crucial strategic issues, it is a life-size
laboratory that is coveted in these times of scarce resources. The 1959
Antarctic Treaty freezes territorial claims, prohibits resource
exploitation and military deployment, but for how much longer? This is
the question posed by Bureau d\'études, conceptual artists, and Ewen
Chardronnet, author, with their project Planète laboratoire, presented
today at the MEP. A periodical journal of philosophy of science and
critique of technology, this third issue (1) of La planète laboratoire
takes a pessimistic look at what they call \"the terminal phase of
nihilism.\" The articles express concern about the trivialization of
geoengineering under the pretext of combating global warming. As early
as the 1950s, projects were hatched to tow icebergs from Antarctica
(which contains 70% of fresh water resources) to supply the deserts.
Today, iceberg water is used to make beer and vodka in Newfoundland.
Canadian researcher F. William Engdahl deciphers the motivations of the
\"seed bunker\", installed in the Arctic archipelago of Svalbard by the
Gates Foundation, Rockefeller and the GMO giants, who store the seeds of
known cultivated varieties there in anticipation of a cataclysm. Phase.
In addition to the conferences, \@rt Outsiders presents the I-Tasc
project (2), an independent scientific-artistic base that will host, in
the Arctic, collaborative projects between indigenous cultures, artists,
hunters, scientists, engineers and tactical media specialists, around
migration, climate and telecommunications. First phase: the deployment,
in 2008-2010, of a mobile, self-sufficient high-tech lab, with no impact
on the environment, and the establishment of an open-source
communication infrastructure that should serve as a model for the Inuit.
Marko Peljhan will discuss I-Tasc at the closing conference \"Art and
Environment\" on October 12 at the Cube in Issy-les-Moulineaux. (1)
downloadable from laboratoryplanet.org (2) www.interpolar.org

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1249

In collaboration with HEC Montréal, we publish our weekly column on the
challenges that companies face in terms of management. What
distinguishes free software from proprietary software is the license
under which the software is distributed. A free license grants, in
particular, the right to modify and distribute the software. Free
software therefore offers certain options that the purchaser may or may
not exercise, depending on their choice. The challenge is to establish
the real value of these options and to determine under what conditions
it is advantageous to exercise them. The development option The
development option applies when the organization wishes to modify the
basic software to add functions and features that meet its specific
needs. The software then serves as \"starting code.\" The organization
can focus its efforts on developing value-added features that meet its
specific needs. Such an approach of marginal modifications represents a
smaller investment than that normally required to create an application
from scratch. If the organization does not have the resources, it can
always outsource this task to an external consultant. In either case,
however, the savings from avoiding license fees can easily be swallowed
up by the costs incurred by these changes. Worse still, the changes can
make it difficult to adopt new versions of the base software or to
implement fixes. Despite these disadvantages, it can still be
advantageous to exercise the development option, especially if the
software is intended for a large number of users, each representing a
saved license fee. The service option Adopting open source software
gives the organization the flexibility to choose how and from whom it
obtains support and maintenance. This is the service option. The ability
to determine for itself when and how often fixes or new versions are
installed can be advantageous even if the organization does not exercise
its development option. The adoption of the product by a significant
number of users can stimulate the creation of local suppliers. As a
consequence, competition between them can also lead to better services
while ensuring that the organization is not at the mercy of a single
provider. It is important to note that a company can exercise its
service option without opening the source code and without developing.
The reverse is not true, however. This is because the modifications it
makes to the base code are not supported by the organization responsible
for distributing the original product. The company that exercises the
development option must therefore necessarily exercise the service
option. Not exercising the options It is important to pay attention to
the \"service gap\" that exists with regard to software, whether free or
proprietary. The service gap refers to the set of activities necessary
to make a software usable in an enterprise. Sometimes this gap is very
large, as in the case of an integrated system whose associated support
costs can be several times greater than the license fees. In other
cases, such as office software, the gap is small. Software with this
characteristic represents an opportunity for significant savings for the
company. Evaluating the options Choosing free software does not create
any obligation to obtain the source code or to exercise the development
option. The most favorable situation is one where the software is
distributed under a free license, where the number of users is high and
for which the service gap is minimal. Even if the service gap is
significant, the possibility of distributing the software free of charge
in the company generates savings each time the number of users increases
or when the time comes to upgrade to a new version of the software. To
better limit the gap and the associated expenses, however, it is
preferable to stick to standardized versions (configured once, installed
repeatedly) that allow for centralized technical support and maintenance
services. Free software is not necessarily the ideal solution for every
organization or in all circumstances. However, it offers possibilities
that cannot be found with proprietary software and that can better meet
the needs of the company. As such, free software deserves to be
considered very carefully when making the acquisition decision. Michael
Wybo is an associate professor at HEC Montréal He is a member of the
Interuniversity Research Center for Organizational Analysis (CIRANO) and
the Information Systems Research Group (GReSI)
www.hec.ca/profs/michael.wybo.html

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1250

In 2008, two Quebec organizations notified the Quebec Superior Court of
their intention to sue the government for not having used a call for
tenders process for its software procurement. In addition to seeing
procurement by award as a derogation from its own rules and a hindrance
to free competition, these organizations maintain that the government is
foregoing significant savings by moving directly to new versions of
proprietary software instead of considering the acquisition of open
source software. For its part, the government justifies its action by
emphasizing that some of these purchases are simple \"updates\" and not
purchases of new software. To which the complainant organizations
respond that open source software could easily replace proprietary
software, without loss of functionality, while providing substantial
savings. According to these organizations, the government is acting as
if it were a subsidiary of the major software publishers. As usual, the
truth lies somewhere between these two extreme positions. What it is not
It is first useful to clarify what free software is not. Free software
is neither a technology nor a software development process. It is not
necessarily free, nor necessarily more powerful, more secure, or easier
to use than proprietary software, and it certainly does not represent
the end of the software industry. What it is, first and foremost, is
software. This means that it must be conceptualized, its specifications
defined, it must be developed, tested, implemented, maintained, and
supported in its use. What gives it its \"free\" aspect are the terms of
the license under which it is distributed. In short, the license of
proprietary software normally gives the user tenant rights: he can use
the software, but it does not belong to him. On the other hand, the free
license confers owner rights. The user has the right to install the
software on as many computers as desired, modify it according to his
needs and distribute it with or without his modifications. He may even
ask to be paid to distribute copies, with or without his modifications.
For example, Ubuntu software, a version of Linux, can be downloaded for
free from Ubuntu.com. It is also sold by Amazon.com for \$12 per copy,
plus shipping! Equipment The biggest misconception we encountered in our
research is that adopting open source software automatically means that
the organization must also be equipped to develop, maintain, and support
it. Another common perception is that the company will be at the mercy
of a group of anonymous \"hackers\" for these essential services. The
reality is that most open source software is distributed by
well-established organizations with permanent staff and competitively
priced support services. Of course, open source software gives its user
the opportunity to do their own development, maintenance, and support,
but it does not require them to do so. The fact that the software is
open also means that it is possible to develop local skills to provide
these services. No software is truly \"free\" in terms of its deployment
and use in an organization. But in the case of open source software, the
choice of vendor and the level of support remain the sole responsibility
of the organization adopting the software in question. This aspect
should be explicitly taken into account in the choice of software by
public institutions that have a role to play in the local economy. It is
quite possible that the acquisition costs of open source software
(without license fees) and its maintenance contract are more or less
equivalent to those of proprietary software whose maintenance is
included in the license fees. Features The decision to adopt software,
whether open source or proprietary, must be based on the evaluation of
its features, performance and compatibility with the IT infrastructure
already in place. This decision must also take into account the
acquisition and use costs of the different options offered. Open source
software also offers the possibility of exercising property rights and
determining by whom, how and at what price essential services will be
provided. The best way to inform such a decision is still an open and
transparent tendering process. Next week, we will discuss the evaluation
of the property rights that free software can provide. The author is an
associate professor at HEC Montréal: www.hec.ca/profs/michael.wybo.html

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1251

New York - T-Mobile on Tuesday showed off its G1 phone, the first mobile
phone to run on the Android operating system developed by Google to
compete with Apple\'s iPhone. The device will go on sale in the United
States starting Oct. 22 at a lower price than the iPhone 3G: \$179
instead of \$199. The G1 is made by Taiwanese company HTC, which sells
most of its products under private labels. \"Android has the potential
to become the equivalent of Linux for computers, and we expect sales to
account for about 10 percent of the smartphone market in 2011,\" said
Roberta Cozza of marketing firm Gartner.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1252

New York - The telephone operator T-Mobile presented to the press
yesterday its G1 telephone, the first portable handset to work with the
Android operating software developed by the internet group Google to
compete with Apple and its iPhone. The device will be sold from October
22 in the United States at a price lower than the iPhone 3G: US\$179
instead of US\$199. Customers will also have to subscribe to a two-year
subscription with T-Mobile, a subsidiary of Deutsche Telekom, of between
US\$25 and US\$35 per month. The British will be able to buy it from
November, the other Europeans (in Germany, Austria, the Czech Republic
and the Netherlands) at the beginning of next year. The G1 is
manufactured by the Taiwanese company HTC, most of whose production is
sold under distributor brands. Other models running on Android are
planned next year from LG and Samsung. \"Android has the potential to
become the equivalent of what \[free software\] Linux is for computers,
and we expect sales to account for about 10 percent of the smartphone
market in 2011,\" said Roberta Cozza, an analyst at marketing firm
Gartner. The main operating systems that power smartphones - Symbian,
Microsoft and RIM to name a few - are proprietary, while Google is
making its Android freely available to developers. \"Google is entering
the mobile market not to be another mobile phone maker, but to open up a
large market for its services and applications,\" said Carolina Milanesi
of Gartner. Google co-founders Sergey Brin and Larry Page said they had
been using their G1 for several weeks, which had fueled speculation for
months. \"It\'s as good as a computer from a few years ago,\" Page said,
adding that \"being able to search \[the Internet\] with the reliability
that you could on a laptop is really, really worth it.\" Thicker than
the iPhone 3G, which has been a huge success since its launch in July,
but narrower, with a matte black or white plastic shell (a brown version
will also be sold in the United States), the G1 has a touch screen that
can be slid open to reveal a real keyboard. It provides many of the
applications common to competing models, such as GPS, and will allow you
to download music sold by Amazon, or watch videos from YouTube, the
website bought by Google in 2006. In total, the \"Android Market\",
which competes with Apple\'s \"AppStore\", should allow you to download
about 50 applications on the first day of marketing - a far cry from the
3,000 applications, including 600 free, that Apple offers. But Android
being an open platform, the idea is to encourage the development of many
other possibilities. Google has already received some 200 projects
thanks to the \"Android Challenge\" launched to its loyalists. \"For me
who is a computer geek, it\'s great to have a phone that I can have fun
with and that I can modify,\" stressed Sergey Brin. The phone is also a
showcase for all Google products, such as the Chrome browser launched at
the beginning of the month, such as Google maps or Gmail email, the only
one that allows you to be alerted as soon as an email arrives (push
technology).

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1253

T-Mobile, Google and HTC unveiled the \"G1 with Google\" yesterday in
New York, the first multimedia phone on the market that will use
Android, the operating system developed by Google. To distinguish itself
from the iPhone and the BlackBerry, Android defines itself as the first
open mobile platform, for which application developers are free to
create the services they want. This system is not just Google\'s
business. It will be shared by the approximately 300 members of the Open
Handset Alliance, a group of device manufacturers, wireless network
operators and mobile service developers from around the world. The
footprint of the Mountain View, California, computer giant is
nevertheless enormous. Its search bar is omnipresent on the device: in
its address book, in its e-mail inbox and on the Web. The G1, which is
based on another phone called the Dream and is made by Taiwanese company
HTC, can be controlled in two ways: you can swipe the screen, much like
Apple\'s iPhone, or you can use the small slide-out QWERTY keyboard that
hides behind the device. That combination is particularly effective when
it comes to surfing the Web, says HTC president Peter Chow. \"It\'s a
new way of seeing where and how people are navigating the Web. It\'s a
more robust and effective solution than anything we\'ve seen before.\"
Other Google services also come standard on the G1. For example, the
Google Maps app combines GPS with an electronic compass and a 360-degree
view called Street View, which is exclusive to Android. These functions
are integrated into a graphical interface that is not unlike the desktop
of a personal computer, on which one can place, virtually of course,
photos, shortcuts to launch applications, and so on. Mobile free
software This is only the tip of the iceberg for Android, however,
because it is the mechanics behind these applications that are proving
to be the most interesting feature. \"High-speed mobile networks have
been around for some time now, but we lack the right tools to use them
properly,\" said Chris Shloeffer of T-Mobile yesterday. \"North America
is a leader in telecommunications, but we are lagging behind in
mobility. Why? Because the experience was not particularly pleasant for
users.\" According to T-Mobile, Android improves this experience in two
ways: first, the Android system will not age. Second, the Android
Marketplace, accessible from the device, contains all the applications
developed for this platform. These only work on Android, which leads
many to question the interest of another mobile platform, which is added
to the BlackBerry, Symbian, Windows Mobile and the iPhone. Unlike the
latter, forecasts give it only a small place on the market, of about 4%.
Google retorts that Android has the advantage of being completely free,
in the same way as the Linux system. \"It is a platform that will allow
any developer to create mobile applications according to the changing
needs of users\", believes Andy Rubin, the creator of Android. \"A free
space for developers that will evolve Android and the whole of computing
mobility.\" Wendy Rozeluk, a spokeswoman for Google Canada, adds that
Android breaks down barriers because even though the T-Mobile network in
the U.S. is the only retailer of an Android device, \"there are already
Canadian developers who have created apps for it, and two of them have
even won awards in developer competitions,\" she says, referring to
Ecorio and ShareYourBoard. Rozeluk admits that Google has no plans to
launch Android in Canada, however. \"Not at this time,\" she concludes.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1254

The feeling of isolation is the bane of many self-employed workers.
Cafés? Often noisy and not very ergonomic. Sharing a workplace with
peers could be a good compromise. When they are tired of being isolated
at home, some self-employed workers set up shop in cafés or libraries.
Since February, they have had another option: Station C, the first and
only community office in Montreal. Essentially, the community office is
a place where you can work, chat with peers and even meet clients in a
professional setting, at a lower cost than a single-user office,
explains Sylvie Laferté, professor of marketing and management at TELUQ.
From 2001 to 2006, self-employed workers increased from 10.1 to 13.3% of
the Quebec workforce, according to the Institut de la statistique du
Québec. At last count, the majority of them did not have employees.
That\'s a lot of people working alone in their corner, subject to all
the temptations to \"procrastinate\" that can be found at home. Between
the cat that wants attention, the movie that follows the noon news and
even the laundry basket, there is no shortage of distractions. In fact,
not everyone has the discipline necessary to work alone at home,
emphasizes Luc Brunet, industrial psychologist and professor at the
University of Montreal. But above all, we must understand that man is a
social animal, he says. \"Being surrounded by people, getting out of the
house, enjoying a good work atmosphere, these are all factors that
contribute to motivation.\" At Station C, in the heart of Mile End,
users, who are called members, indeed insist on the appeal of contact
with people. In the large loft, there are no closed offices, only large
communal work tables. Two conference rooms can be used for private or
long calls. Christine Préfontaine, a regular member of Station C, is not
even self-employed! She is a senior communications advisor for a
government agency, which allows her to work remotely. \"I have an office
at home that is a five-minute walk away, but I prefer to work here,\"
says the 39-year-old, who decided to pay for her membership out of
pocket. \"It gives me access to a community.\" Since everyone is pretty
busy with their own little business during the day, she has set up an
\"Open Salad\" concept. Every Tuesday, members are invited to bring a
few ingredients to create an impromptu salad buffet. There is a fridge
and a dishwasher on site. Other members find logistical advantages to
the formula. \"Typically, I come to work here between two meetings or a
few hours before my badminton games at the end of the day. It allows me
to avoid rush hour,\" notes Martine Pagé, a 42-year-old screenwriter and
journalist. At first, Ms. Pagé was worried that the other members would
chat all the time. \"On the contrary, the atmosphere is very conducive
to work,\" she says. \"I would be more productive if I came more
often.\" The members\' ages range from late twenties to late thirties.
About a quarter are English speakers. No exclusions Professions related
to the tech field are overrepresented, but \"we don\'t exclude anyone,\"
observes Daniel Mireault, a 34-year-old freelance artistic director and
co-owner of Station C with Patrick Tanguay. The practical side: \"We
provide the table, the chair, the Internet connection, a printer and a
projector. Members can bring their own screen if they wish,\" says Mr.
Mireault. Opening hours Currently, Station C is open to everyone from 9
a.m. to 6 p.m. Members get a key to the premises, with 24-hour access.
Drop-ins are welcome---they can even try it out for a free day---but
soon, they'll have to check the web before dropping by. Indeed, starting
November 3, the centre's hours will be variable. "We're going to ask
members to indicate their presence on a public Google calendar so that
those who don't have a key know when they can come," says Daniel
Mireault. Will members be disciplined enough to make their presence
known? "I can't wait to see if it works," wonders the co-owner. In
keeping with the open-source software style, the community office
concept is a work in progress. And since the goal is often not to make
money, there's room for exploration.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1255

Bare computers in department stores? The idea is gaining ground.
Especially since Luc Chatel, Secretary of State for Consumer Affairs,
\"wished\" in June that \"on the price of computers, we specify the
price of pre-installed software, so that consumers have a choice and can
get a refund\" for the operating system that is pre-installed on them.
The measure was supposed to be effective at the start of the school year
in September, but distributors, like manufacturers, are dragging their
feet. The IT market is unique in that the consumer is forced to pay, in
addition to the hardware they purchase, the license for their operating
system. In other sectors of activity, we would talk about forced sales.
But while Microsoft\'s monopoly has been the subject of several appeals
in Europe and the United States, computer manufacturers do not want to
make public the wholesale prices they negotiated with the IT giant. For
Racketiciel.info, \"these software programs that we are forced to buy\"
represent 10% to 30% of the price of computers sold in stores. That is,
100 to 300 euros. LEGAL ASSISTANCE Created by users of free software,
the site demands the right to be able to buy computers without having to
pay what it calls the Microsoft \"tax\". It also offers to provide legal
assistance to those who would like to be reimbursed. In one year, three
consumers have been reimbursed. Since the launch of Windows Vista,
Microsoft\'s latest operating system, these protesters have been joined
by the cohort of those who, disappointed with its performance, have
preferred to reinstall the old system, Windows XP. Because unless you
buy an Apple computer or go to certain specialist stores, it is
impossible today to buy a computer without Vista. Racketiciel.info also
explains the steps to follow to buy a PC without pre-installed software,
or to \"rejuvenate\" your old computer, and thus avoid having to buy a
new one when the old one shows signs of age. Contrary to what one might
think, the problems encountered on computers are more often
software-related than hardware-related. But because they don\'t know how
to fix them, many people change their computer rather than repair it.
While it is generally enough to clean the software components of your
PC, and install free (and open source) software such as the Firefox
browser or the OpenOffice office suite. These allow you to benefit from
performances worthy of those of new PCs, if not better.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1256

Les Éditions Gladius International, a Quebec company specializing in the
design and manufacture of board games, is launching a new game
representing the province\'s major tourist attractions: Cherche et
trouve Édition Québec. This observation game includes eight boards
representing the Château Frontenac, the Bell Centre, the sugaring off
season, the Olympic Stadium and the Montreal Botanical Garden, the Gaspé
Peninsula and Percé Rock, the Quebec Winter Carnival at Place
D\'Youville, the Bromont ski resort and a historical board on the First
Nations. The principle of the game is to find the images hidden in the
eight game boards as quickly as possible and the goal is to be the
fastest to find them. The game is on sale in toy and game stores for
\$15. Free Software Day \> Free Software Day will be held for the first
time in Quebec City on Saturday, September 20 at the Saint-Martyrs
Canadien Community Centre from 1 p.m. to 6 p.m. Free Software Day is a
worldwide celebration of free and open source software to raise
awareness of the benefits of using high-quality free software in
education, government, the workplace, and at home. This year in Quebec
City will be the first time that volunteers have formally organized to
celebrate this international event. For more information: http://que
becsfd2008.ngowiki.net Beenox and Cro-Mag Rally \> One of the first
games Beenox and Dominique Brown worked on is making a comeback. Cro-Mag
Rally was included with all new iMacs about ten years ago. Beenox did
the graphics for the game for publisher Pangea Software. Apple is
reviving the game on its new iPhone phones and it is one of the best
sellers on the iTunes Store. Yesterday, it was number one among paid
downloadable applications. Clarification \> A small error crept into the
report on college technology transfer centres. It should have read that
the Maritime Innovation centre is located in Rimouski. André
d\'Orsonnens, Chairman of the Board of Alliance Numérique \> André
d\'Orsonnens, Chairman of the Board and CEO of Druide informatique, has
been elected Chairman of the Board of Directors of Alliance Numérique.
Mr. d\'Orsonnens will be supported by Yan Cyr, President of Enzyme Labs
(Vice-President); Michel Lefebvre, Partner Tax Specialist at Raymond
Chabot Grant Thornton (Treasurer); Claude Martel, President of
Éduconsillium (Secretary). The board of directors is composed of 11
elected directors: Dominique Brown, President of Beenox, Tanya Classens,
President of Kutoka, Stephan Lestage, Vice President of Communications
at Cyber Génération, John Christopher, Global Director of Multimedia
Innovation Services at Ericsson, Jean-François Renaud, Partner at
Adviso, and Alain Tascan, Vice President and General Manager of
Electronic Arts. Media Strategy and Placement \> In his latest book,
entitled Stratégie et placement média, Bernard Dagenais explains how to
choose the most effective multimedia campaign. Advertisers around the
world invest some \$400 billion each year to promote their products,
services or ideas. The author wants to show the hidden side of
advertising. He first delves into the complex relationships between
advertisers, agencies and media. Then, he presents how placement works
in each of the media with useful measurement tools. Published by Presses
de l\'Université Laval, the book sells for \$45. ytherrien@lesoleil.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1257

The \"consumer society\" has almost become anathema, at a time when we
are taking stock of the environment after half a century of an economy
focused on the massive supply of products and services to a passive but
receptive consumer. These two works offer two different, but not
necessarily opposing, visions of the role of the consumer in the economy
of the next half century. Sociologist Marie-Anne Dujarier observes the
trend already present in a growing number of sectors - from the
principle of self-service in mass distribution to the development of
free software by the IT community - to \"put consumers to work\" to make
them contribute to the creation of value. More optimistic, one could
say, the authors of this issue of the journal Economie politique see the
consumer as the prescriber of a reorientation of the production system
towards the creation of socially and environmentally \"responsible\"
goods and services.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1258

First, we did our research on Google. Then we entrusted it with our
email (Gmail), our photos (Picasa), our schedule (Google Calendar) and
finally our office files (Google Documents). While waiting to entrust it
with our mobile phone (with the Android operating system), all that was
missing was being able to run everything in a Google-branded software.
The rumor was indeed coming back quite regularly. It was confirmed
yesterday. Google is indeed working on a web browser: Google Chrome.
Announced as more stable and faster than its competitors, Chrome was
launched yesterday in beta version, only on Windows. The announcement
was made by sending some bloggers a thirty-eight-page comic strip - by
Scott McCloud, known to comic book fans for his book Understanding
Comics - explaining in detail the operation and specificities of Google
Chrome. The news was then confirmed during the day by an article on the
Google blog. \"We realized we needed to completely rethink the browser.
\[\...\] Under the hood, we built the foundations of an engine that
could much better handle the complexity of today\'s web applications,\"
explain Sundar Pichai and Linus Upson, product and development managers.
We also learn that \"like the classic Google home page, Google Chrome is
clean and fast.\" Compartmentalize. Google Chrome is an open source
project based on Webkit - the engine behind the iPhone and Safari, and
used by Google Android, the next phone operating system - and integrates
Google Gears by default, which allows you to run certain applications
while disconnected from the Internet. It also focuses on better memory
management thanks to a \"multi-process design\", which allows each
browser window to be isolated from each other. Closing one frees up all
the resources used. Compartmentalizing tasks in this way should also
reduce browser crashes: if a page freezes, you can simply close the
window without having to restart the software. For security, Google
announces that it will regularly download the list of malicious sites.
Chrome also offers a private mode, similar to the InPrivate offered by
Internet Explorer (also called porn mode, who knows why\...), which
allows you to browse without leaving a trace on your computer. The user
interface is reminiscent of the Opera browser. It uses an intelligent
address bar, called \"omnibox\", based on browsing history and the
popularity of pages, which offers a list of addresses (without having to
type \"http://\...\"), but also searches to launch on Google. Mosaic.
There is also a system of tabs which are placed here above the address
bar (and not below as on Firefox). Similar to Opera\'s \"Speed Dial\",
the default home page displays, in the form of a mosaic, screenshots of
the most visited pages, as well as a selection of the last pages viewed
and those recently saved in favorites. Will Chrome shake up the browser
market (currently dominated by Internet Explorer), or even the very way
they are designed? We will avoid making any hasty judgments, as we
recall the recent disappointment of Google\'s last major project, Knol,
which was announced rather quickly as a Wikipedia killer.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1259

GOOGLE LAST arrow fired yesterday by Google to weaken the giant
Microsoft: the launch of Google Chrome, an Internet browser competing
with Microsoft\'s all-powerful Internet Explorer. The Californian firm
announced yesterday that Google Chrome, its own browser - a software
installed on machines to browse the Internet - would be available free
of charge in 43 languages and more than 100 countries starting that same
evening. The launch of a new browser is a real gamble for the Mountain
View ogre, which has proven itself above all in the field of search
engines. Most computers already have a default browser: Microsoft\'s,
installed on three-quarters of machines worldwide as an additional
service to the Windows operating system. A leading position acquired by
Microsoft after years of fighting its competitors. Netscape Navigator,
the champion of the 1990s, had been eliminated when Microsoft proposed,
in 1995, to offer Internet Explorer with its Windows operating system.
Faster than its competitors Sundar Pichai, one of Google\'s vice
presidents, explained yesterday that with experience, Google executives
had come to imagine a browser that could improve Internet usage: \"We
realized that the Web has evolved from simple written text to rich
applications (such as video and community sites, editor\'s note) and
that we had to completely rethink the browser. What we need is not just
a browser but also a modern platform for Web pages and applications.\"
During a demonstration carried out yesterday at Google headquarters,
Chrome seemed above all much faster than its competitors. On the
computer screen, applications are displayed using tabs and not windows.
It is also easier to simultaneously open sites containing video and
navigate them. The address bar where the sites are displayed works like
on the search engine: just one word is enough for various choices to be
offered\... These practical applications should especially meet the
needs of Web 2.0 fans used to surfing several very lively sites at the
same time. But the public is still a little limited. Google has chosen
to open the source code of its browser to all its competitors. But not
without irony, it will first be usable on computers equipped with the
Windows operating system. Users equipped with Mac and Linux will have to
wait a few months. Worse, before reaching Microsoft, its real target,
the new Google browser could first harm Mozilla, the foundation that
built Firefox, the browser of the free software world that has managed
to carve out a share of almost 20% of the browser market. A shame for
Firefox which offers Google as its default search engine.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1260

Between the negotiations of some to acquire others, the release of new
cell phones that are always as surprising and the new wave of small,
low-cost ultraportable computers, we have the impression that, in our
country, the technology scene is rather calm and yet, it is starting up
again with a bang. Two shock waves are passing one after the other
through the corridor of Quebec industry. First, there is this lawsuit
filed against the Quebec administration to shake up government practices
regarding the awarding of contracts for the operation of its vast
computer network. And then, this news that the Canada New Media Fund
will not be renewed by Canadian Heritage next March. First, let\'s go
back to this lawsuit against the Quebec government. Filed on July 15 by
a Laval free software lobbying organization, complaint No.
500-17-044243-080 challenges the Direction générale des acquisitions du
Centre des services partagés du Québec, Microsoft Canada, the consulting
firm Compugen and the Attorney General of Quebec. The organization
FACIL, for the collective appropriation of free computing, thus wants to
denounce the practices of purchasing software necessary for public
administration without a call for tenders on the part of the Government
of Quebec. Using numerous documents filed with the Superior Court of
Quebec, the Laval organization accuses the government of violating
Quebec law by renewing Microsoft software licenses without first making
calls for tenders. And in passing, the complainant points out that there
are other IT solutions than those proposed by Microsoft and that the
government should consider them. The FACIL organization claims that
Quebec has already paid more than \$80 million to Microsoft to purchase
licenses for the Windows Vista operating system. According to FACIL, the
government awarded software purchase contracts worth more than \$25
million between February and June 2008, without ever going through the
tendering process. But this complaint is not the first for the Quebec
government. Last March, the company Savoir-Faire Linux, which belongs to
the vice-president of the FACIL organization, Cyrille Béraud,
specifically accused the Régie des rentes du Québec of engaging in the
same type of behavior and, therefore, of renewing Microsoft software
licenses without issuing a call for tenders. The Superior Court of
Quebec will hear the complaint from the FACIL organization tomorrow.
Whether one is for or against the way the Quebec government is operating
in this matter, the fact remains that this lawsuit has the merit of
raising the issue of the allocation of IT contracts in the various
departments and, by extension, of hearing Quebec\'s thinking on the use
of free software within its various components. \*\*\* Speaking of the
Charest administration, are you familiar with the Support for the
Transition to the Information Society program? It was launched in
mid-July by the Minister of Finance, Minister of Government Services,
Minister responsible for Government Administration and Chair of the
Treasury Board, Monique Jérôme-Forget. A program of six million dollars
per year to help citizens adopt new technologies in all regions of
Quebec. Administered by the Ministry of Government Services, the program
provides financial assistance to projects and organizations that promote
access to the Internet and information technologies in their regions.
Concretely, the government is seeking to achieve three objectives:
support projects or initiatives that promote access to and use of
technologies, foster closer ties between the state and citizens, and
finally, contribute to the deployment of e-government and the
establishment of a connected Quebec. To achieve this, Quebec will invest
this money in three types of initiatives: projects related to
e-government, in support of the mission of community organizations
active in the field, and in research projects on the socio-economic
impacts of the Internet and information technologies. Stakeholders who
wish to submit a funding application may do so until September 30, 2008.
\*\*\* Finally, a word on the information relayed by the Globe and Mail
that the Harper government has decided to eliminate the Canada New Media
Fund. This is a \$14.5 million per year program to support the creation
and distribution of digital cultural content products. The Regroupement
des producteurs multimédias was quick to react and said it was
\"outraged to learn that the Canada New Media Fund will not be renewed
by Canadian Heritage. This fund, which has existed since 2001, was to
date one of the only programs dedicated to the development of Canadian
content for the independent new media industry.\" According to Quebec
producers, the impacts should be felt on the supply of interactive
French-language content offered to Quebecers and Canadians with the
disappearance of a \$5 million envelope that was generally granted to
the French-language sector. The only hope for people in this industry is
a federal election campaign that could bring a new administration to
Ottawa that is more sensitive to their needs.
bguglielminetti@ledevoir.com Bruno Guglielminetti is a producer and new
technology columnist at Radio-Canada. He is also the editor of Carnet
techno (www.radio-canada.ca/techno).

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1261

So forget CNN and all the 24-hour news channels, not to mention
dinosaurs like NBC, CBS, ABC and\... newspapers, because Barack Obama\'s
running mate and other hot news can be announced to you first in
personally addressed text messages signed \"Barack.\" The Democratic
presidential candidate owes, at least in part, his undeniable success to
the way he and his team have used the Internet and the latest in
communications. Whether or not he is present in the traditional media,
you can be sure that at any given moment he is omnipresent on the Web
and in the wireless world. Of course, he has his own website,
www.barackobama.com, but like any self-respecting networker, he has also
set up his \"page\" on social networking sites like MySpace and
FaceBook, while his supporters exchange videos on YouTube that are
viewed by millions of people. These tools have helped him build an
impressive campaign trove, thanks to many often modest contributions.
But the story doesn\'t end there. In 2004, Howard Dean, the current
chairman of the Democratic Party, also used the Internet extensively to
mobilize volunteers and raise funds, and his presidential campaign got
off to a flying start. But it quickly collapsed. What sets Obama apart
in this regard is probably the \"interactivity\" that characterizes his
use of new technologies. His team encourages grassroots supporters, most
often young people, to organize events and take initiatives of all
kinds. Examples of this participatory approach include the official
campaign poster, which was designed by a street artist, and the video
Yes We Can by the Black Eyed Peas, who set the words of a speech by the
presidential candidate to music and sing them. \"Barack Obama\'s
election campaign will inspire American politics. \"He used Web 2.0 like
no one else,\" believes John Parisella, president of the advertising
agency BCP and communications advisor to the president of Concordia
University. Mr. Parisella volunteered for Barack Obama\'s Democratic
nomination campaign last winter. Along the same lines, the New York
Times has already referred to it as a \"wiki\" campaign because, like
the popular online encyclopedia, the Obama method encourages everyone to
make a small contribution to improving a product that cannot be called
final since it is intended to be eternally perfectible. The product, in
this case, is the program, the team, but also the candidate himself, if
we refer to some of his speeches. The other presidential candidates,
Democrats and Republicans alike, have not encouraged much creativity at
the grassroots level, and the interactivity of their websites has most
often been limited to fundraising appeals. At meetings organized by the
Obama team, activists have seemed to appreciate being invited to speak
on aspects of the program, feeling that their opinions will be taken
into consideration. There is a certain paradox in all this. Barack Obama
is known to be an exceptional speaker, capable of galvanizing huge
crowds in the United States or in Germany. But at the same time, his
participatory conception of democracy forces him to sometimes stand back
or at least give the impression of doing so. According to some
commentators, he sees himself more as a \"facilitator\" than as a
leader. But political reality does not always and in every way
correspond to the virtual reality or to the convivial anarchism that is
supposed to animate the world of \"wikis\" and free software. There are
limits to discretion and to \"keeping a low profile.\" As we saw about
ten days ago, Barack Obama\'s opponents took advantage of his absence
(motivated by a vacation in Hawaii) to launch fierce attacks that caused
him to drop several points in the polls. We can expect him to be very
visible from now on, not only at the Denver Convention, but until the
November election. More visible and perhaps more pugnacious too. \"He is
combative enough to respond to attacks \[\...\]. But he does not want to
fall into negative politics and personal attacks. Obama can return the
ball, but it is not in his temperament,\" believes John Parisella. The
real shadow workers, and who will probably remain so, are Barack
Obama\'s organizers, whose efficiency has been formidable up to now.
Discretion would also be the number one rule of this team, the number
two rule being: \"All credit must go to Barack Obama,\" according to
Rolling Stone magazine (June 10 edition). The group is very disciplined:
no indiscretions, no internal quarrels, as we often saw in Hillary
Clinton\'s entourage. It includes a mix of old hands of Washington
politics, like former senator Tom Daschle and the latter\'s former chief
of staff, Pete Rouse, and Obama\'s Chicago-based close friends, like
campaign manager David Plouffe, spokesman David Axelrod and adviser
Valerie Jarrett. Citizens who receive a \"personal\" message from
\"Barack\" on their cell phone as a first (but at the same time as the
CNN journalist assigned to the file!) can expect to also receive a
message reminding them to go vote on November 4. Databases are no longer
built by patiently leafing through (landline) telephone directories.
Text messaging boosted voter turnout in the 2006 midterm elections by 4
percent, the New York Times recently reported. And it did so at a cost
of \$1.56 per vote, much cheaper than traditional door-to-door
canvassing or phone calls. Text messaging has proven effective in
getting young people and some minorities to register to vote. \"Obama\'s
strategy of targeting 18- to 25-year-olds is very good for getting
people registered, but they\'ve never turned out in large numbers on
Election Day,\" observes Larry Hufford, a political scientist at St.
Mary\'s University in San Antonio, Texas. One-third of 18- to
29-year-olds don\'t have a landline. Text messaging was used extensively
during the primaries and caucuses last winter and spring. In New
Hampshire in January, Barack Obama had a clear lead in the 18-24 age
group, but that did not prevent Hillary Clinton from winning the
election.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1262

Radiohead\'s progressiveness and avant-gardism go far beyond their
experiments on the internet - random price of the album In Rainbows,
possibility of remixing the last video (House of Cards) using free
software, etc. Radiohead\'s environmentalist bias has never been clearer
than in the context of this tour. As we have been able to read for a few
months in various environmentalist publications, the agency Best Foot
Forward was hired by the British band to evaluate the consequences of
its tour on the environment, which led to the implementation of various
measures. Thus, the famous group from Oxford has chosen as much as
possible to perform in places close to city centers or, if this is not
possible, it encourages the public to favor carpooling to get to the
concert. For their travels, the band has chosen the train, bus or hybrid
truck as much as possible, and tries to avoid the plane\... Obviously
the goal is the voluntary reduction of greenhouse gas emissions. In the
same vein, Radiohead asks its fans to take public transportation to get
to the concert, even suggesting hyperlinks to Parc Jean-Drapeau and the
STM on its official website! Cycling is also encouraged. The band also
warns its fans not to go by car (even by carpooling) because parking is
limited. What\'s more, the merchandise that accompanies the tour is made
of organic cotton or recycled materials, including a fiber created with
plastic bottles. For the European leg of the In Rainbows tour, Radiohead
has joined the association Les Amis de la Terre, which urges governments
and the European Union to commit to fighting climate change by setting
annual rates for reducing their greenhouse gas emissions. Radiohead is
therefore preparing to take over Parc Jean-Drapeau for a third time.
Without a doubt, the best performance was in 2001, at the time of the
Kid A/Amnesiac cycle, those two albums that definitively detached
Radiohead from the rock pack, relegating all the Coldplays on earth to
the ranks of popular groups without a major contribution. In 2003, the
group returned to Parc Jean-Drapeau following the release of Hail To The
Thief, a transitional album for a transitional tour. The concert and the
scenography were not as remarkable as the previous stopover, one of the
greats in the history of the group of groups. And tonight? If the
conditions are right, the evening could prove to be just as memorable as
that of 2001. Yesterday at noon, 32,500 tickets had already been sold.
Mild weather (showers are feared) could attract 10,000 more fans. An
ecosystem in itself!

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1263

Ton Roosendaal is a stubborn boy whose stubbornness could well shake up
the world of cartoons. In 1988, he created what would become the leading
3D animation studio in the Netherlands. In 1998, he decided to market
Blender, the software that his company had developed, separately. In
2008, he just put online the second entirely \"free\" cartoon in the
history of 3D (the first dates back to 2006). And he is about to publish
Apricot, a video game that, if it is not the first to be \"free\", will
probably be one of the most accomplished, judging by the first extracts
put online at the beginning of July. Released on May 30, Big Buck Bunny
tells the story of a giant rabbit with a big heart confronted by three
mean little rodents. Ten minutes long, it cost only 150,000 euros, but
easily bears comparison with the cartoons of Hollywood studios. Viewed
by nearly a million Internet users, it has been downloaded several
hundred thousand times, for free. Because Mr. Roosendaal has been a
fervent supporter of the spirit of \"free\" since the transformation of
Blender into free software saved him from disappearing when his company
went bankrupt in 2002. SHARE, MODIFY\... Anyone can thus access its
source code, in the same way as chefs who make their cooking recipes
public. Better still: Mr. Roosendaal has decided that the very content
of his cartoon would be \"free\". It is possible to download it, share
it, but also modify it, or even recover elements of it to incorporate it
into another cartoon, all for free, provided that you respect the
\"Creative Commons\" (CC) license attached to it. This legal mechanism
allows content to be protected, just as free software licenses allow
source codes to be protected. Most bloggers publish their posts in
\"CC\" mode, and tens of thousands of musicians and photographers do the
same for their creations. The Creative Commons website thus offers to
search, via several search engines, for content expressly stamped CC, a
functionality also offered in the search bar of the Firefox browser, the
most popular free software. Until Big Buck Bunny, cinema remained on the
sidelines of this vast cultural liberation movement, or almost: failing
to \"liberate\" their blockbusters, the major animation and special
effects studios all use free software, which equips 95% of their
computers\...

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1264

Summer in Quebec is the season of festivals and terraces. But this year,
it\'s not just music and comedy that are attracting attention, because
for a week, the Internet was vibrating to the rhythm of the local web,
thanks to the notable launch of two new, ambitious businesses. Just a
few days apart, Evan Prodromou and Harry Wakefield made available to
Internet users last week the sites Identi.ca and Praized.com, two sites
that are as similar as they are different from each other. Virtual word
of mouth Praized offers Internet users the possibility of recommending,
or not, a business located anywhere in North America. Thanks to an
agreement with the Yellow Pages Group and an American counterpart,
Praized has a database of 17 million businesses, estimates its CEO,
Harry Wakefield. \"We\'re trying to reproduce a village spirit, where
everyone knows each other, and where everyone knows the qualities and
faults of local merchants,\" he says. Mr. Wakefield and his two
acolytes, Sébastien Provencher and Sylvain Carle, spent two years
developing this service, which aims to be much more than a simple
website specializing in restaurant, bar and other reviews. \"Praized is
not a destination, it\'s a platform,\" explains its co-founder. Our goal
is to provide a completely free tool for bloggers and other sites that
would like to develop their own recommendation service.\" Originally
from San Francisco, Evan Prodromou has lived in Montreal for five years.
He is a seemingly inexhaustible source of ideas. His projects include a
site on travel destinations, one on wine and another aimed at (future)
parents in need of advice. Identi.ca is a microblogging platform,
similar to Twitter, Jaiku and Plurk. \"Users write short messages on the
site, which their friends can access via instant messaging, SMS or RSS,
explains its creator. This allows you to reach dozens of people by
sending just one message.\" The reaction of the blogosphere took Mr.
Prodromou completely by surprise, with Identi.ca making headlines on the
most important Silicon Valley blogs, from TechCrunch to Slashdot, which
are very influential on the Web. \"We went from a private beta to the
Internet limelight overnight. In 36 hours, we had 10,000 subscribers. We
had to change servers.\" A paid system To achieve their goals, both
Praized and Identi.ca are banking on the strong values of the famous Web
2.0: free service for users and developers, use of social media, etc.
With one difference: \"What most open source companies fail to do is
integrate their profitability model into their service,\" explains the
president of Praized. In other words, just because it\'s popular
doesn\'t mean it\'s paid. So Praized thought differently. For example,
sites that integrate Praized can make money by displaying advertising.
The Montreal startup makes its own profit when Internet users click on a
link redirecting them to the recommended merchant\'s page, located on
the Yellow Pages Group portal, which then passes on a royalty to them.
For its part, Identi.ca aims to be the first platform of its kind that
is entirely free (open source). The software that makes it work can
therefore be taken over by other developers who would like to launch a
microblogging site in turn. \"There are over a hundred of these sites in
the world, but they don\'t talk to each other. We want to change all
that,\" summarizes its founder, who then plans to ride the wave of
popularity of microblogs around the world. In short, between two
festivals, this summer could just as well be the season of web 2.0 in
Montreal. \"And Internet users everywhere are starting to realize it,\"
concludes Evan Prodromou.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1265

Alain Corneau, Bertrand Tavernier, Catherine Breillat, Jean-Jacques
Beineix\... Thirty-one filmmakers support in Le Monde the \"Creation and
Internet\" bill presented by Christine Albanel, Minister of Culture.
They defend \"without reservation\" a text that many supporters of free
software, including MEPs such as Daniel Cohn-Bendit (Greens) and Vincent
Peillon (PS), describe as \"liberticide\". Judging that free culture is
an \"intellectual scam\", the filmmakers believe that this text, which
is to be debated this autumn in Parliament, \"preserves the right of
authors to continue making films\".

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1266

André Gunthert. \"Is it fair to extend the model of the recorded music
industry or the paid press to all cultural exchanges, to predict \"a
disaster announced for citizen democracy\"? Economists have too often
limited their work to the analysis of monetized exchanges, leaving
entire sections of our societies in the shadows. However, in the fields
of arts, knowledge and cultural practices, it is easy to show that the
essential choices are based on free use and collective appropriation. A
few examples. The public domain. We can read, and what is even more
important, quote, discuss and re-appropriate Aeschylus, Shakespeare or
Victor Hugo freely, for a minimal or no access cost. How is this
possible? If the cultural heritage of humanity were copyrighted like the
films of Metro Goldwin Mayer, its cost would be much higher and its uses
strictly limited to the private space. It is to avoid this situation
that the notion of public domain was invented, which all works of the
mind are included, seventy years after the death of their author. After
a reasonable period of time intended to protect the income of the author
and his family, the usufruct reverts to all. This is the rule that
allows us to benefit from the majority of the world\'s artistic and
cultural production. Scientific production. Einstein never patented
relativity. In the scientific field, the bulk of the production of
knowledge is freely accessible to all, with patent protection for
applied research remaining a limited and temporary exception to this
principle. No legislation allows for indefinite protection: after a
period generally of the order of twenty years, the invention becomes
collective property again. In the field of human sciences, knowledge is
freely usable from the moment it has been published. Freud never
received royalties on the use of the notion of lapsus, any more than
Bourdieu on that of habitus. No society for the protection of scientists
has cried out against theft or demanded the drafting of a law
prohibiting the misappropriation of knowledge. Why? If not because in
this field, the social consensus considers it normal that the author
should provide the result of his work for free. The contribution of
amateurs. The development of the negative-positive system that founded
the rise of photography owes everything to the amateurs who, between
1848 and 1890, brought this technique to the point where it became
interesting for industry. Many technologies would not have the same face
without the disinterested work of these user-actors. The role of free
software has been a decisive element in the long-term development of
systems that could not have found satisfactory conditions for their
implementation in the principles of private enterprise. Embedding visual
content. While the rules of law are drastic for recent productions (any
unauthorized use is prohibited), and the practice of electronic
bartering has given rise to restrictive legislation on online sharing
all over the world, the Web has invented a principle of formidable
efficiency to circumvent the limitations of intellectual property. When
you quote a video seen on YouTube on your blog, you are not copying the
content. The trick that allows you to circumvent the rule is the
principle of embedding, i.e. a player that can be exported via a piece
of code, the copy of which is not considered to infringe the copyright.
When we know that this principle can be applied in the same way to
Flickr photographs and to most visual content offered by platforms, we
realize that there is more than a simple infringement of the right to
quote, but an essential condition that gives the Web its current
appearance. (1) "Internet and the disaster of 100% free advertising",
Libération, June 27.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1267

San Francisco - Microsoft founder Bill Gates spent his last day as CEO
yesterday at the software giant\'s offices and will hand over the
company\'s destiny to his friend Steve Ballmer as of Monday. In terms of
functions, Mr. Gates\' departure is mostly symbolic, as one of the
world\'s richest men no longer held operational responsibilities at
Microsoft. After handing over the CEO role to Mr. Ballmer in 2000, Mr.
Gates had already given up his titles of chief software architect and
head of research and strategy in June 2008, as he had promised to do two
years earlier. The Microsoft founder will also retain the only remaining
mandate he held, that of chairman of the board of directors, although
his presidency will now be non-executive. He also remains the group\'s
largest shareholder, with around 8.7% of the capital. But Mr. Gates\'
influence remained strong on the group\'s strategy and his departure, to
devote himself to his humanitarian foundation, is a turning point, which
comes at a time when the group is seeking to change its model. A model,
essentially focused on paid software, which is increasingly being shaken
up by the Internet revolution. Thanks to this great upheaval, the one
that is now its main competitor, the Google group, has developed.
Microsoft\'s foray into search engines, Google\'s specialty, through its
MSN portal, has had mixed results. Despite colossal investments,
Microsoft is still lagging far behind in terms of revenues from online
advertising, which represented a quarter of Google\'s in 2007. The
software publisher tried in February to regain control by swallowing up
the Internet group Yahoo!, putting \$44.6 billion on the table. But
Yahoo! turned down Microsoft, despite a price deemed attractive by
analysts, preferring to continue on its own. After raising its offer,
Microsoft chose to give up. Provocatively, Yahoo! immediately formed a
vast partnership with Google. And while this relationship should allow
Google to strengthen its hegemony in advertising, the Internet group is
now hunting on Microsoft\'s historic territory, by offering free
software, similar to the office applications sold by Mr. Gates\' group.
Free software, particularly that of the IBM computer group, Lotus
Symphony, also challenges Microsoft\'s dominant position, while the
latest version of its Windows operating system, Vista, has been the
subject of strong criticism. Released at the end of 2006, Vista has only
sold 150 million licenses, with many companies preferring to keep XP,
the previous version. Not only have the new features not convinced
compared to Windows XP, but Vista has also proven incompatible with many
software and peripherals. Another factor unfavourable to Windows is the
insolent vigour of Apple\'s Macintosh computers, the only microcomputer
manufacturer not using Microsoft software, which have seen their sales
soar over the past year and increased their share of the global market
to more than 5%. Challenged by Apple, as well as by Google, on its core
business, Microsoft has also failed for the moment in its attempt to
break into the portable music player market, dominated by Apple\'s iPod.
Its Zune portable music player, launched in November 2006, represented
only 4% of the American market in the first quarter, compared to 71% for
the iPod. In the field of consumer electronics, the group can however be
satisfied with the success of its XboX games console.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1268

Like every day for the past 1,712 weeks, Microsoft founder and \"chief
software architect\", William Henry Gates, will go this morning to
Redmond, not far from Seattle (northwestern United States), to the
campus of the world\'s leading computer company. Like every day for the
past thirty-three years, he will go to greet some of the company\'s
30,000 developers, write two or three memos on the future of the Web or
the \"digital cloud\" and go to the home TV studio to record a few
messages, which will be broadcast at events that he will not attend. An
almost ordinary day in the life of this 55-year-old businessman, third
richest in the world behind Mexican telecommunications magnate Carlos
Slim and American investor Warren Buffet. Except that it will be his
very last as Microsoft\'s first employee. Relations. Tonight, the
post-Bill era begins. The father of Windows is leaving all executive
functions within the company. But he remains the chairman of the board
of directors and one of the largest shareholders with 9% of the capital.
And he has promised to devote one day a week to the future - more
uncertain than ever - of Microsoft. After a little rest in his immense
high-tech estate overlooking Lake Medina, then some public relations
this summer at the Beijing Olympics, this great philanthropist - in the
purest American tradition - will devote almost all of his time to his
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, the world\'s leading private
humanitarian organization with 37.5 billion dollars in cash (23.8
billion euros). Time for redemption for the man who, since the age of
19, has accumulated more wealth than almost anyone else on earth? This
great nerd (crazy about computers), frankly introverted - \"He prefers
technology to men\", says a former colleague of his - thus puts an end
to a two-year transition period during which, he claims, he prepared
\"in the smallest detail\" his disengagement. A withdrawal that
coincides above all with the beginning of an era of all dangers for
Microsoft. Light years away from that April 4, 1975 when, in the company
of Paul Allen, the young programmer dropped out of Harvard - he was
destined to become a lawyer like his father - to create his start-up.
Its ambition was to write a program for the Altair, the very first
personal computer. But it would owe its meteoric rise to MS-DOS
(Microsoft Disk Operating System), the operating system that Microsoft
managed to get the undisputed leader in the sector, IBM, to adopt. By
obtaining a non-exclusivity clause from the all-powerful Big Blue, the
ancestor of Windows would very quickly proliferate on competing clones
of IBM and become a quasi-monopoly that today equips more than 90% of
the billion PCs on Earth. A cash cow for Microsoft: if this activity now
represents only 60% of the turnover of this \"octopus\" - as its
detractors call it - with diversified activities, it still ensures
almost all of its profit. Competition. If it is daring to speak of
decline regarding a company whose turnover (60 billion dollars this
year) maintains double-digit growth and remains the first market
capitalization in the sector with 270 billion dollars, the best years of
the \"PC-centric\" world are now a thing of the past. Vista, the latest
version of Windows, is a \"disaster\" according to Newsweek, to the
point that some buyers are demanding to return to XP, the old system. A
failure that is good business for Apple whose market share (around 5%)
is soaring and which likes to mock in its ads the blues of those
disappointed by Vista. Microsoft\'s other pillar, the Office suite of
desktop software, is increasingly being challenged by free products from
the world of open source software, which Gates once described in a
moment of madness as \"a kind of new modern-day communist.\" And then
there\'s Google\... the new Microsoft of the Internet era, which has
just thwarted Microsoft\'s acquisition of Yahoo and is shaking the
fundamentals of the model developed by Gates: the paid license. A
\"phenomenal\" success, he acknowledges, which has reduced the software
giant to the rank of dwarf in online search and advertising. \"I hope
people want competition in this area, because we have a brilliant team
that comes to work every morning with the idea of creating something
better,\" he says in Challenges this week. Mea culpa, in the form of
praise for competition, from a computer genius as well as a ruthless
businessman? Not the type of character. This new challenge will have to
be met without \"Bill Gates\" as his successor Steve Ballmer calls him.
Failure, very little for Bill\...

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1269

SOFTWARE is said to be free when it meets three criteria: free to copy,
to use and to modify. First used by companies to try to free themselves
from Microsoft\'s supremacy (in PC operating systems, word processing
and databases), the use of these programs is spreading to
administrations and to the general public. Variants of Linux operating
systems (Ubuntu, Mandriva, Redhat, etc.), competitors of Windows, are
used by French public services, like the American administration, in
order to reduce their bills. Even Neelie Kroes, European Commissioner
for Competition, has taken a position in favor of \"open technical\"
standards in IT, in an indirect attack on Microsoft. \"The Commission
will support the use of products that use open and well-documented
standards,\" she declared. The cost of free software is linked to its
installation and maintenance, carried out by experts. Microsoft has
finally taken free software seriously, and has teamed up with Novell to
build a commercial offering for businesses. In addition, individuals are
now using free software. To launch its first €300 laptop, Taiwanese Asus
used a Linux operating system. The same goes for vending machines, which
reduces the cost by \$50. And these customers can download Open Office
for free, on the Internet, instead of buying Microsoft\'s Office.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1270

DASSAULT SYSTEMES LE FIGARO.- Why are there so few European publishers
in the global leading pack? Bernard CHARLÈS. - I think that our software
industry is fundamentally not recognized by the French public
authorities. We do not operate in the same way as other industries. In
software, we represent small numbers. No one has thought that there
could be a European software industry. The governments of the Union that
look into our businesses find the companies too small, without thinking
that before becoming very big, publishers actually started out very
small! What measures could change the situation? Europe has never made a
serious proposal on the fact that there could one day be a virtual
market. It limits itself to saying welcome to free software! Free
software is a good thing but it is not an economic model that excludes
others. Europe does not address the problem of intellectual property.
His only initiative was to create a tax on discs. This is the utmost
stupidity. Our patent systems are not adapted to the virtual market, we
must constantly refer to Asian or American models in this area. You have
launched a platform dedicated to 3D called 3dvia, a version of which,
3dvia Shape, is accessible to the general public. How do you ensure that
intellectual property is respected there? It is true that we give
amateur communities the possibility of using all kinds of content on
this platform. We have set up a protocol that allows you to choose
either to share content for free or to retain the rights by specifying
them. I think that this crucial subject of intellectual property on the
virtual market is not a European problem but a subject that falls more
broadly under the World Trade Organization (WTO).

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1271

Agoravox, a participatory journalism site, has just celebrated its 3rd
anniversary. Literally \"the voice of the public square\" has
inaugurated in France a model imitated on the South Korean Ohmynews
launched in 2000 which makes citizens producers of information. Created
within Cybion, a company specializing in Internet monitoring, the
Agoravox site has now become a foundation. The model seems to be
increasingly attractive for the financial independence it provides, but
French laws make it difficult to apply to a media outlet. Interview with
Carlo Revelli, the creator of Agoravox, who is going to Brussels next
week to sign the statutes. Agoravox will in future have its headquarters
in the Belgian capital. Why did you choose the foundation model? In the
Internet sphere - free, open source or collaborative software - it is a
fairly common model, especially in Anglo-Saxon countries. Look at the
Mozilla Foundation, Wikimedia which manages Wikipedia, Linux, Ubuntu,
Richard Stallman\'s Free Software Foundation or the Electronic Frontier
Foundation. All things considered, we have been thinking for a long time
about the evolution of Agoravox in this direction. Participatory, the
site brings together several thousand contributors; they do it, so it
belongs to them. It had to be consistent with our participatory
journalism model. In addition, we want to protect its independence and
protect it from collusion. On this subject, I can\'t help but think of
the famous declaration of independence of cyberspace that John Perry
Barlow, the co-founder of the Electronic Frontier Foundation, had the
courage to read in Davos in front of all the heads of state of the
planet, in 1996. This text remains very relevant today\... Have you had
any buyout proposals? Investors from the media and finance worlds have
approached us. Agoravox was even valued, at the time of the presidential
election and the peak of enthusiasm for Web 2.0, at between 10 and 15
million euros\... I did not create this site with the aim of making a
profit. We have reached a time when we need to invent new media models
that reconcile ethics and the quest for informational neutrality. Why in
Belgium? Initially, we wanted to create our foundation in France, but
the legal constraints are too demanding. A public utility foundation
requires a minimum contribution of one million euros, to wait at least
one year to obtain the status and above all to accept that the Ministry
of the Interior sits on the board of directors. There was no question of
linking Agoravox to a ministry or a political function. In Belgium, the
conditions are more flexible and better able to fully guarantee the
independence of the structure, without an initial financial outlay. And
the opinion is given after three months. How will the financing be
organized? Advertising revenue should cover the site\'s operating costs.
With an audience that varies between 800,000 and 1 million visits per
month, advertising brings in between 20,000 and 30,000 euros per month.
At the same time, the foundation will allow us to appeal for donations.
But we remain cautious. Unlike Anglo-Saxon countries, the
French-speaking public does not have a strong culture in this area.
These funds will allow us to develop other sites, particularly abroad;
an Italian version will soon be online. They will also provide financial
support for participatory surveys, a new form of investigative
journalism where Internet users provide information and testimonies and
monitor the work that is being done before their eyes. An investigation
is currently underway into poverty. Who will sit on the board of
directors? Apart from Joël de Rosnay (co-founder of Cybion) and myself,
we would like an editor from Agoravox to be present. Contributors have
been organizing for a few days to form an association and lay the
foundations for a society of editors. Agoravox has a thousand active
editors and 35,000 in total who have submitted articles. It is essential
that one of their representatives sit on the foundation. What do you
think of other participatory news sites? They are generally journalism
sites with a participatory editorial policy. At Agoravox, the editorial
policy is made by the editors themselves, the vast majority of whom are
not journalists. We are 100% participatory. As for the economic model, I
do not believe in paying for the Internet. And so far, no model has
proven to be particularly successful. None of these sites are rolling in
gold. Our path is information patronage, like ProPublica in New York,
even if we are not comparable. It is therefore quite encouraging to see
that in the United States, American patrons are beginning to finance
genuine investigative journalism initiatives.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1272

ACER \"OUR objective is to sell 6 million mini-PCs in the second half of
the year worldwide, or between 400,000 and 500,000 units in France,\"
says Daniel Trachino, director of the consumer division of Acer, the
Taiwanese group, number three in the world for PCs and second for
laptops. From the outset, Acer therefore aims to overtake its competitor
Asustek, better known by its abbreviation Asus. The latter, also
Taiwanese, has cleared the market for low-cost PCs with its EeePC,
marketed around 300 euros in France for the first 30,000 units sold with
an SFR subscription. With a third version of the EeePC, launched this
week in Taipei at the Computex computer show, Jerry Shen, the boss of
Asustek, is only hoping to exceed his initial target of 5 million units
in 2008. To beat his compatriot, Acer has just unveiled a wide range of
low-cost PCs. Called the Aspire One, the PCs will be available for
between 299 and 379 euros, starting in mid-July. Weighing around one
kilogram, each machine is equipped with a color screen (22.6 cm
diagonal) larger than the EeePC (18 cm). And its microprocessor is more
powerful than the first EeePCs, with the latest Atom from Intel instead
of a chip from Taiwanese Via Technology. The first machines offered by
distributor brands, such as those from Surcouf and The Phone House, have
also been launched with the least expensive microprocessors to keep the
price under 300 euros. HP, Dell, Sony are coming \"About twenty products
are in the pipeline,\" assured Jean-Pierre Champion, the president of
The Phone House in France, in May, when he presented his first low-cost
PC model, designed by a Spanish subcontractor, Airis, and assembled in
China. All the big names in IT - the American manufacturers
Hewlett-Packard and Dell, the Japanese Sony and Toshiba, the Chinese
Lenovo, and the Fujitsu-Siemens duo - are on the starting line. They
should be coming out in the coming weeks. Each will try to differentiate
itself thanks to its models according to the microprocessor, the size of
the screen, the autonomy without recharging and the communication
modules. And a major constraint: a ceiling price of around 350 euros.
The mere integration of Microsoft\'s Windows XP Home operating system,
instead of a free Linux software, increases the price of the PC by 50
euros.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1273

Just mention the idea of a law targeting the illegal downloading of
cinematographic or musical works on the Internet for France, the
European champion of online piracy, to split in two. Between activists
for everything free and fierce defenders of creators\' rights. The
\"creation and Internet\" bill, which is to be presented to the Council
of Ministers on Wednesday 11 or Wednesday 18 June, is no exception to
the rule. Directly derived from the law on copyright and related rights
in the information society (Dadvsi) and the proposals of the Olivennes
mission, this text aims to establish, under the aegis of the future High
Authority for the dissemination of works and the protection of rights on
the Internet (Hadopi), the sending of personalized warning messages to
fraudulent Internet users. Before a registered letter or a suspension of
Internet subscription. On this last point, the Council of State could
issue a negative opinion, considering that the courts and not Hadopi
have the authority to order suspension measures. The fact remains that
the government sees the entire system as a way to get out of the current
system of criminal repression that will continue to target professional
pirates - fines of up to 300,000 euros and three years of imprisonment -
to fight more effectively, through a system of \"graduated response\",
against more \"ordinary\" piracy. Such a proposal is far from unanimous.
The specialist magazine SVM attacks the bill, publishing in its June
issue a petition signed by 19,000 Internet users, including MEPs such as
Guy Bono (PS), Daniel Cohn-Bendit (Greens), Vincent Peillon (PS) and
numerous associations defending free software. They fear widespread
filtering of networks. The entourage of Christine Albanel, Minister of
Culture, specifies that \"the way of detecting fraudsters by sending a
\"hook\" on P2P networks will be the same as today\". SVM also
criticizes \"the criminalization of Internet users\", while, Rue de
Valois, there is talk of \"reducing the penal system for a more
preventive and more effective system\". Finally, SVM considers this law
\"liberticide\", \"unworthy of a modern economy\". The whole debate is
based on this clever balance between protection of privacy and the right
of property of artists. The big names of the French Internet, united in
the Association of Community Internet Services (Yahoo!, Google,
Dailymotion\...), criticize any cutting of access. Already, the European
parliamentarians have questioned the chosen French approach. On 10
April, they narrowly validated an amendment calling for \"avoiding the
adoption\... \[of sanctions\] such as the interruption of access to the
Internet\", in a report presented by the French socialist Guy Bono and
supported by Michel Rocard. This report, although not binding on the
French government, delighted the European Consumer Association (BEUC)
which sees in the cutting of access to the Internet \"a
disproportionate, ineffective measure and, more seriously, \[which\]
violates certain fundamental rights such as the rights to the
presumption of innocence and the protection of personal data\". However,
the MEPs did not continue on this path: on Tuesday 3 June, they rejected
this same Bono amendment in the report on telecommunications. Christine
Albanel\'s best allies will be the record producers. On 26 May, Pascal
Nègre, as president of the Civil Society of Phonographic Producers
(SCPP), launched an appeal to Nicolas Sarkozy to adopt the bill as
quickly as possible. \"Every month that goes by, 10 to 15% of the music
industry\'s turnover disappears,\" he said, referring to the social
plans of EMI and Sony-BMG. COPYRIGHT To support his argument, he cites
the results of an Ipsos survey conducted for the SCPP: 74% of French
people would be in favor of the government\'s anti-piracy bill. Better
still, 90% of those surveyed would stop downloading if they received two
warnings. 90% of those surveyed linked the drop in record sales (-23.2%
in the first quarter of 2008) to illegal music downloading. Pascal Nègre
summed it up as \"people are ready to stop if the whistle blows for
recess.\" According to him, there is nothing \"repressive\" about this
text, since this system of sending warning messages has proven itself in
Belgium, Germany and Great Britain. Sacem will also defend this bill,
considered \"the best possible compromise\", according to the chairman
of the board, Bernard Miyet. He would have preferred that access
providers \"who have made their fortunes through piracy\" finally pay
royalties seriously. \"This law will have to be massively applied, and
therefore given the technical and legal means to be so\", he says, in
order to launch paid music online on a large scale. Sacem\'s collections
fell from 140 to 90 million euros in records between 2002 and 2007,
while those generated on the Internet rose from 1 to 6.6 million euros.
A micro-market.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1274

Last Saturday evening, at the Québec City Convention Centre, the
Fédération de l\'informatique du Québec announced the names of the
winners of the 2008 Octas. Revenu Québec and the SAQ were awarded twice.
With Gestion du projet Refonte TPS à Revenu Québec and Indices de
richesse, and for the latter project the Octas de l\'excellence as a
bonus, Revenu Québec became a double winner during the last evening of
the Octas. The Société des alcools du Québec (SAQ) was not to be
outdone, having been a double recipient for Service Conseil, au bout des
doigts. At the Convention Centre, Gilles Brassard was named Personality
of the Year in the IT world. Special mentions, designated by the juries,
were also awarded to Philomène Longpré and the students of the Cégep de
Saint-Jérôme. The Greater Montreal Real Estate Board and the Quebec
Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food each received a mention of
excellence. - Consumer electronics - B2C The Director of Civil Status,
Services Québec, Ministry of Justice, for the project The DÉClic online
service - B2B inter-company electronics Greater Montreal Real Estate
Board, for the project MLS® Centrisª System - Online learning and
knowledge management Société des alcools du Québec, for the project
Service Conseil, au bout des doigts - IT project management Revenu
Québec, for the project Management of the TPS Redesign project at Revenu
Québec - Technological innovation - 25 employees or less AudiSoft
Technologies, for the project Frontline Gateway, an operational video
communication for multiple users - Technological innovation - 26 to 250
employees Organix IT, for the project Smart Video Monitoring System
(SVMS) - Technological innovation - 1000 employees and more Revenu
Québec, for the project Wealth indices - Games and animation Kutoka
Interactive, for the project Mia Lecture: Alerte aux Bestigroux! -
French in information technology The Integrated Centre for Industrial
Mechanics of Chaudière and the Beauce-Etchemin School Board, for the
Online Industrial Design Program project - Technology serving the
community - 100 employees or less Zone Accès Public Sherbrooke, for the
ZAP Sherbrooke project, a free wireless Internet network - Technology
serving the community - 101 employees or more SOGIQUE, the Bell IT
Management Company and Santé et Services sociaux Québec, for the Refonte
Info-Santé and Info-Social project, a program of privileged access to
information for all Quebecers, at all hours and every day - IT in the
cultural, educational and media sectors Société des arts technologiques
(SAT), for the Telepresence Station 2.0 project - Student succession -
college level From the Cégep de Sainte-Foy, Sébastien Bourgoing, Francis
Perron, Simon Pouliot, Philippe Troie, for the 3D Racing Nunavut video
game project - Student succession - university level From the University
of Sherbrooke, Nathaniel Audet, Vincent Chartrand, Francis
Gauthier-Fredette, Maxime Grégoire, Francis Lapierre, David Mailhot,
Frédérick Martel-Lupien, Simon Poissant, David Therriault, for the
Vsmash project - Commercial success LMSOFT, for the WEB CREATOR
project - Online public services The Director of Civil Status, Services
Québec, Ministry of Justice, for the DÉClic online service project -
Business solution - Internal development - 100 employees or less Greater
Montreal Real Estate Board, for the MLS® Centrisª System project -
Business solution - Internal development - 101 employees or more Société
des alcools du Québec, for the Service Conseil, au bout des doigts
project - Business solution - Free software University of Sherbrooke,
for the monPortail project, the virtual campus of the University of
Sherbrooke - Business solution - Software packages Company in limited
partnership Prolam, Le Groupe Créatech, a Bell Canada company, for the
Dynamicsª NAV project, a strategic tool for Prolam - Transformation of
organizational processes - 1,500 employees and less Société de gestion
informatique SOGIQUE, Ministère de la Santé et des Services sociaux
(MSSS), for the Information System on Mechanisms for Access to
Specialized Services (SIMASS) project - Transformation of organizational
processes - 1,501 employees and more Ministère de l\'Agriculture, des
Pêcheries et de l\'Alimentation du Québec, for the FLORA-TAXES project,
fundamentally simpler!

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1275

SHERBROOKE - Less than a year old, the ZAP Sherbrooke project is
attracting attention in the world of information technology, by
receiving a major award. The network of free wireless public Internet
access zones (ZAP), chosen as the grand winner in the \"Technologies
serving the community\" category, is one of three grand winners from the
Sherbrooke region who were honoured this weekend at the 2008 OCTAS Gala
of the Fédération de l\'informatique du Québec (FiQ). This award
recognizes the innovative nature of ZAP Sherbrooke, which mobilized the
community to successfully deploy more than 165 free wireless public
Internet access zones for the Sherbrooke community and its visitors. The
results compiled show that the project makes Sherbrooke \"the most
connected city in Canada with 167 access points (ahead of Montreal which
is second with 152)\", the \"fourth most connected city in North America
(behind only Austin (328), Atlanta (305) and Chicago (183))\" and \"the
city with the best Internet accessibility in North America when
considering the ratio of the number of access points vs. the size of the
population\" (113%). It should be remembered that the ZAP Sherbrooke
connection points (www.zapsherbrooke.org) have been installed in public
places such as cafeterias, libraries and cafés. They can also be found
in art centres, shopping centres and dentists. Nine months after the
launch, more than 5,000 people had accessed the Internet using the ZAPs.
The login portal is scheduled to be modified next June to promote
cultural, community and sports associations. In addition, an OCTAS was
also awarded to the Vsmash project prepared by students from the
Université de Sherbrooke, namely Nathaniel Audet, Vincent Chartrand,
Francis Gauthier-Fredette, Maxime Grégoire, Francis Lapierre, David
Mailhot, Frédérick Martel-Lupien, Simon Poissant and David Therriault.
Vsmash stood out in the \"Student Emerging - University Level\"
category. This project aims to explore and promote various ways of
experiencing museums. It is an immersive virtual reality system offering
a human-machine interface where the user has the feeling of truly moving
through a space based on the effort made. Finally, the OCTAS in the
\"Business Solution - Free Software\" category was won by the project
\"monPortail, the virtual campus of the University of Sherbrooke\".
monPortail is an intranet environment that allows students to access a
wealth of information about themselves using a simple personal
identification code: electronic and instant messaging, directory,
scholarship directory, libraries, courses, internships, schedules,
academic results, available jobs, course materials, tuition statements,
posting of notices, etc.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1276

\"Our mission is to help companies capture the best ideas in the world
and use them to define strategic priority solutions.\" Anil Rathi, the
boss of IdeaCrossing, is not a little proud to count among his clients
large companies like Hilton, American Express, Harley Davidson or
Daimler Benz. Good ideas are his specialty. His small company of ten
employees, based in Cleveland, finds them on the Internet. They come
from a network of more than 2000 students and 88 graduates in economics.
Exploiting the gray matter of blogs, forums, and other expressions of
the Web as a source of innovation, this is the credo of IdeaCrossing,
but also of many other companies like NineSigma or Marketocracy. In
English, we call it crowdsourcing. The principle: a crowd of Internet
users responds to a competition or a proposal issued by the crowdsourcer
on a defined theme. The latter collects and stores good ideas or
information by offering a reward to the lucky ones. Then it resells them
at a higher price to individuals, companies or investors who have
requested them. This has the advantage of simplicity. The resource used
for crowdsourcing can take more or less elaborate forms: Internet users
solicited at random, a panel formed over time by specialized
crowdsourcers, sites and forums dedicated to the birth of Internet
users\' ideas or even communities of Internet users deciding to exploit
the vein. Such as that of Cambrian House. With 64,000 people, it is
about to launch Vencorps, a website on which investors and venture
capitalists will evaluate business creation ideas. Cambrian will reward
the Internet user who has proposed the best project by offering them
shares in Vencorps. Profit. The model of inspiration for this new
service is the Wikipedia encyclopedia on the Internet. Written by
thousands of Internet users, it is regularly updated and offers a wealth
of information. Simply, this participatory model is applied to the field
of business and innovative ideas. And there you have it. For companies
that are looking to cut costs, it\'s all profit. Addressing talented
Internet users, rather than high-priced professionals, allows them to
bring back skills at a lower cost and sometimes even for free! Of
course, not every idea put forward by a virtual crowd is necessarily a
good one. But if it is new and formulated by many people, it is because
it has a good chance of already being socially received, and therefore
commercially low risk. One of the pioneers of the genre, the InnoCentive
platform, thus allowed Ed Melcarek, a 57-year-old Internet user and
researcher, to win a bonus of \$25,000 by helping the Colgate-Palmolive
research and development unit find a new toothpaste formula. In the same
spirit, YourEncore uses a network of 4,000 retired researchers ready to
find forgotten knowledge or solve the problems posed by its clients
Procter and Gamble or Boeing. As with IdeaCrossing, the contributors who
have been selected give up their intellectual property rights in
exchange for royalties, money or a job. \"The contributor must even sign
an undertaking that covers any conflict of interest, confidentiality and
transfer of rights,\" explains Brad Lawson, boss of YourEncore. Bright
future. France is not to be outdone. The Grenoble start-up Crowdspirit
opened its \"ideas box\" on its site in September 2007. It allows
independent inventors or experienced tinkerers who have free time to
exhibit their electronic product discoveries. Internet users comment on
them, rate them and complete them. Then, \"it is up to the manufacturers
who have spotted certain inventions to contact the inventors and manage
this between themselves,\" explains Lionel David, the founder of
Crowdspirit. Internet users receive, based on their performance,
\"points\" giving the right to one or more products. After evaluating
the development costs, if a sufficient number of promises to purchase
allow the product to be profitable, it is offered for sale. \"The
strength of such networks comes from the diversity of intellectual
profiles they recruit,\" says Karim Lakhani, a professor at Harvard, who
has studied the phenomenon. \"The most effective networks are those that
weave the widest range of information, knowledge and experiences.\"
According to the latter, the mechanism makes it possible to integrate
\"the expertise that is on the periphery. We are witnessing the birth of
a new type of competition, the \"qualified\" knowledge of the crowd
against that of the expert and the professional.\" This phenomenon,
which is in the process of organizing itself into a real market, could
gradually compete with the traditional economy. When we know that more
than a billion individuals use the online network today, it is
impossible to ignore the potential that this \"lonely crowd\" represents
for the future of commerce and trade. By 2015, practically all fixed
communication and broadcasting networks will be federated on the Web.
For marketing departments, this looks like a bright future. \"The free
exchange of ideas will be the great idea of the century,\" emphasizes
Denis Ettighoffer, author of Netbrain (Editions Dunod). The craze for
participatory sites for sharing ideas and projects is set to take off,
with the massive increase in the number of Internet users in emerging
countries suggesting a considerable market. With the Internet, more and
more amateurs are able to create and sell things that were once the
preserve of professionals. Self-taught people, qualified students
struggling to find a job or seniors who need additional resources,
crowdsourcing allows you to have a sideline activity, which also escapes
the taxman thanks to the micropayment system on the Internet\... Or
simply to have a voluntary activity. \"The unprecedented nature of
crowdsourcing is not only its economic scale but also its societal
impact\", maintains Jeff Howe, journalist at Wired magazine, who will
publish a book on crowdsourcing in July with Editions Crown Books.
Slavery. Like YouTube whose resources (videos) are produced by a virtual
crowd of unpaid amateurs, many start-ups in the new economy rely on
exploiting the volunteer work of millions of Internet users. \"This
phenomenon, which could, in the near future, be described as \"temporary
work 2.0\", is tending to become widespread. It is gradually competing
with the so-called traditional economy\", observes Jeff Howe. The latter
shows that what was an epiphenomenon, confined to the world of free
software (open source), is in the process of winning the attention of
the business world. As a result, some predict the disappearance of
experts and artisans in the more or less short term. A foretaste of the
image side: you can buy an amateur photo from the crowdsourcer
iStockphoto for a tenth of the price of a photo provided by an agency or
a professional photographer. \"Photo-Internet users\" do not even earn
enough to finance their cameras or software update licenses, while
iStockphoto\'s revenues are increasing by 14% per month. Will the
phenomenon cause the general impoverishment of individual ideas,
personal creativity having the greatest difficulty competing with the
mass of trends, results of collective tastes that are in the air?
Critics of crowdsourcing are already talking about madsourcing or
stupidsourcing. They denounce a new form of slavery, a new marketplace
for the poor, the worst, since the slaves volunteer to carry out small
tasks for a few cents.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1277

During a public debate organized last March by the Vivagora association
on the theme \"How to put innovation in democracy\", the philosopher
Bernard Stiegler, president of Ars Industrialis, underlined the
difficulty in thinking about \"the earthquake triggered by these
mutations\" brought about by \"transformational technologies\" such as
the Internet, nanotechnologies or biotechnologies. \"Our enemy is the
stupidity of industry, not industry itself,\" he emphasized. \"Our
society is in trouble because it can no longer tolerate the separation
between production and consumption, between experts and laymen.\" The
\"culture of contribution\" found in collaborative technologies
(Wikipedia, free software, social networks, etc.) has developed because
society wants it. It rehabilitates the figure of the amateur, and
therefore that of the citizen, \"this amateur of politics.\" These
technologies of trans-individuation can just as well \"liberate the
uncontrollable\" as provide solutions or build desire. It all comes down
to a question of regulation from which new behaviors will emerge. \"The
worst,\" warns Bernard Stiegler, \"would be for us to watch these
phenomena pass by like cows watch trains go by.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1278

Its name is Miro, a name that doesn\'t suit it well since it\'s a
television and video software. An application that gives you something
to see, in other words. It can be downloaded at the following address:
www.getmiro.com/. This tool, developed by the Participatory Culture
Foundation - a non-profit organization founded in 2005, based in
Massachusetts - is free and open source. While Joost (Le Monde, Monday,
April 30, 2007), created by Niklas Zennström and Janus Friis - also
inventors of two revolutionary Internet concepts, namely Kazaa
(peer-to-peer exchange software) and Skype (free telephony, sold to eBay
for more than 2 billion euros in 2005) - seems to be struggling to find
its footing, Miro is growing and enjoying great success with Internet
users. Its main function: download and sort new information from sites
and video blogs to which the Internet user is subscribed, without the
slightest intervention from the latter. Each time the computer is turned
on (and connected to the Internet), Miro discreetly connects with the
indicated sites and downloads, before classifying them, the latest
videos. You can therefore watch them later, without having to connect to
the said sites, and without missing any. ALL FORMATS An example: let\'s
say you are a fan of both the \"Guignols de l\'info\" on Canal+ and the
LCI news bulletins. Not missing any can be tedious. But thanks to Miro,
once the address is indicated, the software will automatically download
in the background the programs that you have not yet seen. Better still,
Miro will regularly indicate new programs available in your language, or
not. But that is not Miro\'s only function. First of all, the software
is a video player, capable of reading almost all formats currently
encountered (from QuickTime to WMV, including MPEG, AVI, XVID, etc.). In
addition, the application allows access to high definition (HD) content.
Above all, the software offers the possibility of downloading videos
from Dailymotion or Youtube, the major sharing sites, where it is
usually only possible to watch films in \"streaming\" (i.e. without
downloading them). Another unique feature is that the user can save a
search keyword, and then automatically receive new corresponding videos
as soon as they are posted online. This is to say that Miro is
definitely not very well named.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1279

The end of the ultimatum is approaching. On April 5, Microsoft gave
Yahoo! three weeks to accept its takeover offer. With the April 26
deadline looming, the war of soundbites is raging. The tone changed on
Wednesday, April 23, when Steve Ballmer, Microsoft\'s CEO, on a trip to
Milan (Italy), declared that he was offering \"a lot of money.\" \"If
the shareholders agree, that\'s good,\" he said before adding, \"We are
ready to move forward without a merger with Yahoo!.\" Is this a real
desire to give up or is it simply a threat intended to discourage the
Internet portal\'s shareholders who are demanding a revaluation of the
offer? For his part, Chris Liddell, Microsoft\'s CFO, hammered home on
Thursday, April 24, during the presentation of the group\'s quarterly
results, that he saw \"no reason to raise its offer.\" He also added
that a decision would be made next week to break the impasse. \"If no
progress is made toward an agreement, we will announce further details
next week on our alternatives, which include either going directly to
shareholders or pulling out,\" he said. If Yahoo! executives continue to
reject Microsoft\'s offer, the giant will either have to abandon the
deal or launch a hostile takeover bid by preparing an offensive to gain
seats on the Internet portal\'s board of directors. The battle between
Yahoo! and Microsoft has been going on for nearly two months. The
world\'s leading software company, keen to counter Google\'s dominance
of the Web, decided to launch a takeover bid for Yahoo! in early
February. It said it was prepared to pay \$44.6 billion (28.2 billion
euros), half in cash and half in shares. An amount that would make
Yahoo! the largest acquisition ever made by Microsoft. CULTURAL
DIFFERENCE But this juicy offer did not convince Yahoo!\'s management,
led by its co-founder Jerry Yang. They rejected it on the dual grounds
that it did not value the most visited portal on the Internet at its
fair price and that their company was strong enough to continue on its
own. The cultural difference between the two companies was also
mentioned to explain the Yahoo! management\'s reluctance to fit into the
Microsoft mold. Yahoo! therefore multiplied its contacts to find
solutions. Many counter-offensive alliances were imagined. Like the one
that would see a rapprochement with the media group Time Warner, eager
to sell or support its Internet branch AOL, while, for its part,
Microsoft would ally itself with the media giant Murdoch to win the
game. To repel the unsolicited takeover bid, Jerry Yang did not hesitate
to approach its great rival Google. They decided to conduct a test
together by bringing together their search engine and advertising
activities. In concrete terms, Yahoo! is using Google\'s advertising
machine to sell ads to Internet users who search on its portal. A system
closely monitored by the American Department of Justice, which has
acknowledged having opened an investigation into the possible
consequences of this agreement in terms of competition. The stakes of
this battle of the titans are on a par with the intensity of the fight.
For Microsoft, it is about increasing its positions on the strategic
Internet market. In its sights, the advertising investments of online
advertisers, which continue to benefit from strong momentum. Mr. Ballmer
also justified, on February 1, his company\'s attempted takeover bid for
Yahoo! by an online advertising market of \"80 billion dollars in
2010\". Microsoft has a second objective. It must face the rise of the
Internet, which threatens the historic positions of the world leader in
software. The growth of the free software model, which allows users to
use, modify or distribute for free, is challenging Microsoft\'s core
business. Microsoft\'s quarterly results illustrate this trend. In the
first three months of the year, sales of the Windows operating system
fell 23% to \$4.02 billion, and sales of Office desktop software also
fell 1.6% to \$4.74 billion. Overall, despite the strength of its
entertainment products business, such as the Xbox game console and video
game software, Microsoft\'s revenues are stagnant. Even if it fails to
get its hands on Yahoo!, Microsoft\'s priority, which has significant
financial resources, will remain to accelerate its shift to the
Internet.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1280

How do you manage the information technology (IT) department of a
company whose employees are considered some of the most tech-savvy in
the world? For Google\'s IT director, security means having the freedom
to choose your technology tools. Douglas Merrill, Google\'s IT director,
knows a thing or two about this. His job is to provide Google employees
with the technology tools they need and make sure they meet security
standards \-- without imposing too many restrictions on how they work.
So the 37-year-old manager has taken an unorthodox approach. Unlike many
other IT departments that try to control the technology tools their
employees use, Merrill\'s team allows Google employees to download
software as they please, use whatever type of computer and operating
system they want, and use in-house software designed by the company\'s
engineers. Internal Version Recently, he has also been busy convincing
customers to use Google\'s own enterprise software \-- such as Google
Apps, an internal version of its Web services program that includes an
e-mail manager, word processor and calendar. Mr. Merrill, a
surfer-haired, T-shirt-wearing manager, studied social and political
organization at the University of Tulsa in Oklahoma and earned a
master\'s degree and a doctorate in psychology from Princeton
University. He gets most of his IT knowledge from previous positions: as
a computer scientist at RAND Corp., a senior director at Price
Waterhouse and a senior vice president at Charles Schwab & Co. He joined
Google in late 2003. We spoke with Mr. Merrill about Google\'s approach
to IT. Here are some excerpts: Wall Street Journal: How is Google\'s IT
department structured? Mr. Merrill: Our IT department is a decentralized
organization because almost every employee at Google is a technologist
of sorts. In most companies, technology is in one organization, locked
down and very standardized. You can\'t do whatever you want. The model
at Google is choice. We let employees choose between different types of
computers and operating systems; they can rely on my department for
technical support. It\'s a little less cost-effective \-- but on the
other hand, it does increase the productivity of Google employees a
little bit. WSJ: How do you provide effective technical support? Mr.
Merrill: We\'re more of a self-service type. For example, say you need a
new application to do a job. You can take your laptop to a tech kiosk
\[i.e., one of the tech support centers inside Google offices\], but you
can also go to an internal website where you download the software and
install it yourself. We allow all users to download the software
themselves. Security WSJ: Doesn\'t that pose security risks? Merrill:
The traditional security model is to double-lock downstream devices
\[like computers and smartphones\] and that makes everyone feel more
secure, but they\'re not any more secure. In our case, it\'s the
infrastructure that we\'ve secured. Not only do we have antivirus and
antispyware on every device, but we also have our mail server. We have
programs built into our infrastructure to monitor for unusual behavior.
So I don\'t really have to worry about what\'s happening downstream. The
traditional security model didn\'t really work. We had to come up with a
new one. WSJ: You rely heavily on open source software and enterprise
software. Can you give us some examples and what benefits you get from
that? Mr. Merrill: We buy software when we have to \-- for example, for
our general ledger, we went with Oracle accounting software; Oracle did
a good job. When it makes sense to buy it, we buy it; when it makes
sense to build it ourselves, we do. For example, because our customer
relationship management program is so closely tied to our advertising
system, we had to build it ourselves. We also believe in competition \--
for example, between operating systems, because each operating system
has its advantages. We use Linux for research. We have the annual Summer
of Code, which recognizes college students working on open source
projects that they think are useful. Consumer Internet WSJ: What\'s
driving the \"consumerization\" of technology in the enterprise, that
is, the borrowing of technology ideas from the consumer Internet?
Merrill: Fifteen years ago, enterprise technology was much better than
consumer technology. That\'s not the case anymore. Enterprise technology
used to be about uptime, security, and speed. Enterprise software
doesn\'t have the same advantage in that regard as \[some consumer
software\]. The big question is, \"When consumer software is useful, how
can it help me reduce my costs?\" Google Apps is hosted on my
infrastructure, and the Premiere Edition costs about \$50 per user. The
original email storage capacity averages 50 megabytes, but can be
expanded to over 10 gigabytes. The response time is better, you can pick
up your email anywhere in the world, and it\'s more cost-effective. WSJ:
When you make this pitch to other CIOs, what do you get the most
skepticism about? Mr. Merrill: When I talk to CIOs at the top 100
companies in America, they ask me, \"What\'s your security model? Is it
really reliable? Is there a catch?\" I tell them that because I had to
build this massive infrastructure to run Google, it\'s no problem to add
corporate data to it. I already had to set security standards because
search data is really private. Few Google employees have access to our
customers\' data, and they\'ve been vetted. We have close relationships
with security people \-- so when people find a problem, they tell us. We
have over 150 security engineers who work exclusively on security.
Security is not a caste system for us: every engineer is trained. We use
automated tools that check every engineer's code. We are able to invest
in information security like no other company. We did it for our
research. In some ways, Google Apps is just a spin-off.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1281

This season, the Quebec label Analekta is celebrating its twentieth
anniversary. To the tune of \"J\'y suis, j\'y reste,\" Mario Labbé, its
president and founder, is beginning a new phase in his profession. \"I
am here to stay; I ask you to write it and it will displease a lot of
people\...\" We can guess that Mario Labbé, a former impresario who
became the boss of the first major classical record label in the
country, has not made only friends in twenty years. He has his frankness
and the reputation of having a volcanic temperament. As is well known
everywhere in the profession, what\'s the point of hiding it? But all
hopes are allowed: \"I must mellow as I get older!\" laughs the boss of
Analekta. What makes him say that? An event that is listed in the
chapter of regrets: \"I regret having fallen out with André Laplante in
1996, over a clause in a contract. I had been carrying this regret
around for a long time. This year, I said to myself: \"That\'s really
too stupid,\" and I remedied the situation, because André Laplante is
still one of the greatest Canadian and even world pianists!\" A good
discussion did the rest: André Laplante would record Chopin for Analekta
in 2009. In 1988, few observers imagined the label\'s longevity. Ten
years ago, the business nearly collapsed, but Mario Labbé held firm. It
was the dark period of his life. \"They wanted to get me out of my
company.\" \"They\" is the Culture and Communications Investment Fund.
We can sense that this alliance has created wounds that are still raw.
\"This partnership created enormous problems for us and I had an
incredible climb back, because we had to buy back shares and make up for
the \$600,000 in losses caused.\" Today, things are going much better,
so much so that Mario Labbé suggests that, recently, he could have
cashed in the dividends of his hard work: \"We could have sold, passed
the baby on to a multinational, because Analekta is a profitable
company.\" But he continued: \"I gave myself the mission, the personal
challenge, of bringing Analekta into the new world; into the digital
world. I want to see what it will look like in ten years!\" Future We
sense that the director of Analekta is very enthusiastic, not only about
André Laplante\'s return to the fold, but also about the solidity of the
pillars of his catalog - Angèle Dubeau and Alain Lefèvre - and the
artistic promise of his new artists, the singers Shannon Mercer and
Marianne Fiset, for example. The key is the development of sales, \"14%
increase in physical products, 72% in downloads for the year 2007\", a
kind of feat in a market in decline. This solidity is partly explained
by what Mario Labbé calls the \"microcosm of Quebec\", with a market
that remains fairly stable: \"Sales of big hits have certainly
decreased - Angèle Dubeau, who sold 50,000 copies, will sell 35,000 -,
but we have taken market share and have new customers, so that we can
stabilize.\" There is also a clear and precise objective: \"My primary
market is the Canadian market. I decided to sell records there and we
are selling them. In the Canadian Soundscan ranking, we have seven or
eight titles in the Top 100 every week. We are outperforming all the
multinationals. That\'s what I want.\" The boss of Analekta does not see
the download market as an Eldorado. He seems to have calmed down
compared to the last two years (his prediction is to see this form of
consumption represent between 30 and 40% of his turnover in three years)
and leaves the compact disc a good ten - or even fifteen - years of
existence, \"as long as the consumer can access the product\". This
access does not worry him too much. ArchivMusic.com has become the
leading seller of classical music in the United States, but the
emergence of sales websites does not yet compensate for the loss of
space of classical in stores: \"A new consumption habit has not yet been
created and that is what we must work on collectively.\" At the top of
concerns on an international scale, we find the French market, a real
disaster. More generally, in terms of the problems facing classical
music, Mario Labbé rages against the Ministry of Education\'s
disengagement from music: \"What has been happening in our schools for
the last ten years is appalling. Beyond culture, music education is an
indispensable foundation.\" Obviously, he cannot hide his bitterness
about the evolution of radio programming: \"Radio-Canada and the CBC,
when it comes to classical music, are not fulfilling their mandate.\"
With Kent Nagano This week, a consecration after many years of patience,
Analekta proudly launched, alongside Kent Nagano, the OSM\'s first album
with Charles Dutoit\'s successor. Entitled Beethoven, l\'idéal de la
Révolution française, this double album, which exists in English and
French, includes two CDs. The first presents (this is the reason for the
two versions) Le Général, a project to combine Beethoven\'s stage music
with a text by Paul Griffith about General Dallaire, whose aesthetic and
musical impasses and improbabilities were described in Le Devoir under
the title \"Un assassinat en règle\" (A Ruled Assassination) when the
\"work\" was presented in concert in January 2007. The narration in the
French version is by Albert Millaire. In the English album, the narrator
is Maximilian Schell, an astonishing performance that seems to emerge
from beyond the grave. Soprano Andrianne Pieczonska recorded her part in
French and English. As is often the case in these cases (this can be
heard in recordings of operas and operettas that include dialogue), the
mixing of voice and music is absolutely not credible, with on one side
the acoustics of a concert hall and on the other, the sound of a radio
studio. The second CD contains the Opferlied op. 121b in German and
three excerpts from Egmont - the overture and the two soprano arias with
the original text - this incidental music which is the essential ferment
of the General. One can imagine that a seasoned computer buyer (Audacity
is a good OpenSource editing software - free) can thus reconstruct on
his computer a \"real\" version of Egmont, untainted by an update which
denies the essence and the ideals which inspired its composition by
Beethoven. The \"hit\" of CD 2 is Beethoven\'s 5th Symphony as heard
last February at the Place des Arts and whose great rectitude had been
very appreciated. It will be noted that the technique renders without
artifice the dynamic felt in the room, notably the astonishing presence
of the beginning of the second movement, usually played more piano.
Under international agreements between Analekta and Sony-BMG, this album
will be distributed internationally on the RCA Red Seal label. It will
thus go on sale in Japan on April 10: just in time for the arrival of
Nagano and his orchestra! Contributor to Le Devoir

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1282

Gilberto Gil Cité de la Musique, 221, avenue Jean-Jaurès 75019. Saturday
at 8 p.m. and Sunday at 4:30 p.m. 38 euros Info: 01 44 84 44 84. CD: Gil
Luminoso (Biscoito Fino). If he weren\'t in great shape, and as fiercely
optimistic as usual, one might think that Gilberto Gil, 65, had started
a long farewell tour. For several months, in America and then in Europe,
the Brazilian Minister of Culture has been performing alone on stage,
guitar in hand (with the intermittent support of his son Bem, guitar and
percussion) to offer a selection of his repertoire spanning\... forty
years. And the repertoire is wide, since it goes from bossa to reggae,
via rock and African music, with a center of gravity towards samba and
baião, a traditional music from the Northeast. Gil has come a long way:
tropicalism, prison, exile in London, all kinds of crossbreeding, small
stretches of the road with Pink Floyd and Jimmy Cliff, big stretches
with Caetano Veloso and Jorge Ben, religious ecstasies, smoking,
ecological emotions, political commitments, and we\'ll keep it short.
Rainbow. The voice sometimes has some difficulties in the high notes
(polyps on the vocal cords), but for the rest, Gilberto Gil is as good
as new, and determined to see life through rose-tinted glasses. \"No,
like a rainbow,\" he corrects in his precious and precise French,
anxious to convey a great message of love and fraternity, because
that\'s the man\... Gil is happy as an artist, it shows on stage. After
London, Brussels, Rotterdam, here he is this weekend in Paris, before
leaving for Switzerland, Spain, Tunisia, etc. Twelve concerts in
twenty-three days. The Beatles\' When I\'m 64 is reproduced in a
nonchalant bossa version, No Woman No Cry is barely retouched, but we
vibrate especially with his old compositions, like Expresso 2222, or
more recent ones like Geisha, a samba break. His only song in French is
Renaissance africaine, official anthem of the World Festival of Black
Arts in Senegal, which, as its name sufficiently indicates, intends to
give a boost to the devastated continent. Wooden language. Officially,
the minister is on vacation - and not paid - when the artist is on tour.
But the member of the Lula government continues to happily use thick
wooden language, giving extremely evasive answers to any political
question. It is only on the subject of the Internet and copyright that
the minister gets a little involved: \"I believe that the law must adapt
to technology, and not the other way around. There are many ideas in the
air; we will discuss them in the coming months and there will be a bill
in Brazil towards the end of the year.\" In 2004, Gil released one of
his albums under a Creative Commons license (an adaptation of copyright
in the spirit of free software). Quite logical, coming from one of the
greatest samplers of world music.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1283

Free software, artist cooperatives, decentralization, the new leader of
the Green Party of Quebec, Guy Rainville, did everything he could to
talk about subjects far removed from environmental issues yesterday,
three days after his election as party leader. \"In the past, we were
seen strictly as an environmental party,\" said Mr. Rainville. \"We have
to show that we are a credible party on all subjects.\" He drew several
proposals from his party\'s program, modified by 150 delegates this
weekend in Trois-Rivières. The only subject on which Mr. Rainville and
his party will not have an opinion: the national question. \"We will not
get involved in that,\" he said. \"It is a citizen issue. We are
proposing a law on popular initiative. It is up to citizens to bring
issues (such as Quebec independence) to the National Assembly and it
must then hold a referendum.\" The Green Party also proposes to change
political ecology, with a regional decentralization of powers to elected
bodies. \"No one is better placed than the regions to manage their
resources,\" says Mr. Rainville. The Green Party also promises to\...
not have a party line. \"The members of the National Assembly are there
to represent citizens, not to defend their party,\" says its leader. In
any case, Mr. Rainville assures that \"the Green Party wants to unite on
the theme of the environment\" and that it will continue \"to be a
leader\" on this issue. You can read a more detailed version of this
article at www.cyberpresse.ca/actualites

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1284

A Russian village like thousands of others: wooden huts hidden under the
snow, grandmothers in headscarves leading cows to graze\... In Sepych,
in the Urals, a thousand kilometers east of Moscow, there is still no
gas, but the school is connected to the Internet. And can thus
participate in the global crusade against Microsoft. In May, the
director of the village school, Alexander Ponosov, was fined 5,000
rubles (140 euros) for pirated use of the Windows operating system on
the school\'s twelve computers. Thanks to the Internet, the trial of
this poor bearded ascetic has gone around Russia, if not the world.
Since then, Alexander Ponossov has given up his position as director and
his meager salary of 14,000 rubles per month (390 euros) to promote
Linux free software\... \"Proprietary software represents a danger not
only economically but also for the security of our countries,\" he
attacks. Microsoft programs are not sold at their real price: we pay for
air, it is a full-blown plundering of our country. Thanks to the
automatic renewal of programs, there is also a risk that someone could
penetrate our computers from abroad.\" Within three years, Linux will
equip all computers in Russian schools, compared to barely 5% today,
believes Sofia Vinnitchenko, director of Linux Center, the largest
Russian distributor of this free software. \"It is not so much the
Ponossov affair that helped us as Russia\'s desire to join the World
Trade Organization, which requires the legalization of Russian computer
operating systems,\" this expert qualifies. To date, Microsoft\'s
biggest competitor in Russia remains piracy. In 2007, pirated software
accounted for 75% of the Russian market, according to the Software
Vendors Association (BSA). For this reason, even Microsoft is pleased
with the Ponosov case: \"We have thus realized that piracy is a serious
problem in schools,\" Microsoft in Russia emphasizes.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1285

\"Come on!\" you say to yourself. A video game inspired by Guy Debord
now! What did they go looking for to show off at Libé, huh? Still, yes,
a Debord game. And a warlike one at that. Because Kriegspiel is a pure
computer wargame, with two camps fighting to the death. Appearing ten
days ago on the Net, the game is not yet completely finished, but a
fully playable pre-version is already available (1). Kriegspiel comes
from afar: in 1965, the author of The Society of the Spectacle imagined
his own wargame, a board game called The Game of War, and filed a patent
for it. And it\'s serious, reading the description: \"All the strategic
and tactical reports are summarized in this Game of War according to the
laws established by Clausewitz\'s theory, based on the classical war of
the 18th century, extended by the wars of the Revolution and the
Empire.\" With one goal: \"We can say of the Game of War that it
reproduces exactly all the factors that act in war, and more generally
the dialectic of all conflicts.\" In 1977, a very limited edition of the
game came out with a fabric board and pawns engraved by a craftsman. It
quickly sold out. The game would not be reissued, but Debord published
in 1987, with his wife Alice Becker-Ho, a book containing the rules of
the game (2). In 2007, the book was also translated into English for the
first time. This is how the New York software art collective RSG
(Radical Software Group) discovered it. \"The idea to adapt the game
came from a persistent interest in Guy Debord\'s work, his political
thoughts, his acerbic character, his tireless criticism,\" explains
Alexander Galloway, RSG spokesperson. The game is a work of study and
historical research. Our computer version is an attempt to translate
Debord\'s themes into contemporary language, and thus to renew interest
and better understand his legacy. When Debord created the game, personal
computers did not exist. The computer game is both a tribute to Debord
and a transformation at the level of the code.\" In practice, this
results in a virtual rectangular game board of 500 squares, on which we
will place, among other things, impassable mountains, fortresses and
combat units (infantry, cavalry, artillery, etc.). It is up to each
player to manage the movements, attacks and defenses of his units in the
most efficient way possible. Especially since communications will have
to be taken into account, in other words the ability of units, depending
on their placement, to receive orders. \"Hidden bonuses\". The rules of
the Game of War, while not very complex, are long and precise, and open
up countless tactical possibilities. Kriegspiel works identically to
Debord\'s game. The developers even refused to imagine the possibility
of playing alone against the computer: \"Guy Debord created his game as
a tool to learn strategy against a real opponent. The computer version
is therefore played online against another player.\" But this apparent
fidelity has not prevented RSG from taking some liberties with the
original game: \"We are in the process of including hidden bonuses in
the game that players will be able to discover,\" confides Alexander
Galloway. \"We would like to add one in particular that completely
changes the game, for entirely historical reasons. Debord wrote in his
letters that the game was a simulation of war as it existed in the 18th
century. Today, war is different. We are asking ourselves how to
reimagine the game around the principle of asymmetric warfare that
dominates today everywhere in the world: urban combat, unconventional
weapons, guerrilla tactics, organization in cells\...
\"Codesourceouvert. To illustrate the terrain and the units, RSG called
on the Israeli artist Mushon Zer-Aviv (3), who gave the game a unique
and surprising appearance, a mix of video game and board game. A clear
and sober graphic style, which works wonderfully during combat. The
collective of American developers does not know when the final version
of its Kriegspiel, half work of art, half wargame, will be available,
but imagines that its source code will be open to all, so that everyone
can amend it and that it will remain free. (1)
http://rsg.org/kriegspiel/ (2) The Game of War, Guy Debord and Alice
Becker-Ho, Gallimard, reissued in 2006. (3) http://www.shual.com/

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1286

QUEBEC - The Quebec government could save tens of millions right away by
adopting a policy already in place in several European countries: opting
for open source software, such as Linux, rather than multiplying costly
Microsoft operating system licenses. Cyrille Béraud, the boss of
Savoir-Faire Linux, a computer company on Saint-Urbain Street in
Montreal, has just filed a lawsuit against the Régie des rentes du
Québec with the Superior Court. Last December, the Régie des rentes
announced that it intended to renew the operating system licenses for
its computer workstations without a call for tenders. Microsoft no
longer provides support for its Windows 2000 system, forcing
organizations to migrate to a more recent solution. This \"update\" -
for \$700,000, they wanted to switch to Microsoft\'s Vista system -
effectively eliminated any other proposal. The Régie des rentes had
heard Mr. Béraud\'s complaints, but had subsequently decided to maintain
its decision to use Microsoft, because the civil servants were more
familiar with this system. \"We talked with them for a whole day, we
observed that it was possible for them to switch to free software,\"
observes Mr. Béraud. But we argued compatibility problems in order to
stay with Microsoft, he explains. In its application to the Superior
Court, the company notes that Vista is an operating system \"radically
different\" from its predecessor. Rather than an \"update\", it should
be a replacement of the operating systems, an approach that should be
subject to a call for proposals. Herman Huot, the spokesperson for the
RRQ, confirmed that the lawsuit was served yesterday. The
organization\'s litigation department is currently reviewing it, he
specifies. Such an action is a first in North America, but has already
appeared in other European countries, in particular. Getting Microsoft
out of government offices would create thousands of jobs because local
computer firms, having access to the computer code of this \"open\"
software, could offer services that would be impossible on Microsoft\'s
closed \"proprietary\" systems. According to Mr. Béraud, the Quebec
government has become \"a subsidiary of Microsoft\" while many
governments around the world already use \"free software\" like Linux.
This \"open\" software allows programmers to have access to the codes.
Above all, it is much less expensive. The Quebec government spends 80
million each year on its Microsoft licenses. Already in the federal
government, these systems that run Google in particular have made a
breakthrough. In the Netherlands, all government computers must now run
on free software. \"In France, the entire gendarmerie is on free
software, 100,000 positions have switched. In two years, 400,000 French
civil servants have switched to this type of software,\" observes Mr.
Béraud. And in Brazil, companies cannot respond to calls for tender if
their solutions are not compatible with this type of software, adds Mr.
Béraud.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1287

QUEBEC - Cyrille Béraud, the boss of Savoir-Faire Linux in Montreal, has
just filed a lawsuit against the Régie des rentes du Québec with the
Superior Court. In December, the Régie announced that it planned to
renew the operating system licenses for its computer workstations
without a call for tenders. Microsoft no longer provides support for its
Windows 2000 system, which forces organizations to migrate to a more
recent solution. The Régie wanted to upgrade to Microsoft\'s Vista
system for \$700,000, an update that effectively eliminated any other
offer. The Régie had heard Mr. Béraud\'s complaints, but maintained its
decision to stay with Microsoft, because civil servants were more
familiar with that system. \"We talked for a day, and we saw that it was
possible for them to switch to free software,\" Mr. Béraud observes. But
compatibility issues were cited as a reason to stay with Microsoft, he
explains.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1288

self-produced The Internet is not only a means of distribution for
independent films, but also a means of financing them. Route 66 (photo),
a road trip made in 2004 by Vebfilm, from Leipzig, Germany, was
self-financed thanks to donations from Internet users. An open source
film, downloaded a million times, distributed under a Creative Commons
license - which authorizes copying, modification and even commercial
exploitation. In France, Ralamax offers free films, such as 3263, for
legal and free download. In England, the A Swarm of Angels project
pushes ambition and participation a bit further. Participating Internet
users invest in the film (to the tune of 37 euros) and are also invited
to participate throughout the creative process. The objective: to
succeed in making a collaborative film with a big budget (1.8 million
euros). www.vebfilm.netwww.ralamax.netwww.aswarmofangels.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1289

On the Web, podcasts and videos are scattered all over the place, making
it sometimes difficult to find and view them. To remedy this situation,
Miro, a free and open-source software, appeared at the end of 2007. Miro
allows you to group together videos from all over the Net. The software
has already been downloaded more than two million times, and is enjoying
some success in Europe. Interview with Holmes Wilson, one of the members
of the management of the Participatory Culture Foundation, which is
funding the development of the software. How was Miro born? We have been
interested in intellectual property and access to content for years. In
early 2005, when we began developing Miro, video was still a work in
progress on the Net. The best way to transform this sector was to build
a tool that would allow everyone to become a video broadcaster, a TV
channel. Many of us come from political activism, and the free
distribution of videos is a major issue for them. With technology, we
had the opportunity to create an infrastructure that would change
things. The idea was to create an easy-to-use software, which would be
similar to TV. But instead of TV, which is a very closed world, with a
handful of huge companies, here you have a free choice, with the
possibility of watching any video, from anyone, from the Internet. And
you can also put your videos online. Our project is this: to democratize
video. Hence the first name of Miro, Democracy? Yes. When, at the
beginning of the project, we had to give it a name, we did not want to
simply create a video player, but to change the world of broadcasting.
Hence the name Democracy. But many people believed, because of the name,
that it was an activism tool. This is a goal that we support, but it is
not our main objective. We want to reach as many people as possible,
with videos of all genres: there are videos created by companies,
Internet users, NGOs\... There is music, films, a bit of everything. We
didn\'t want the name to restrict us to a single category. So Miro.
Joost, the new project from the creators of KaZaa and Skype, is another
big video project, which has had a lot more press than you\... There are
many projects around video, and Joost is one of them. But Joost
represents a vision of video that is completely opposite to ours. Joost
is entirely based on digital locks (or DRM, for Digital Rights
Management), we refuse them. Their software is proprietary, while we are
for free software. Your goal today? Since we started, there have been a
lot of changes in the world of video, with YouTube and all the others.
But the way these sites work confirms our vision. The world of video on
the Internet is very centralized, which creates problems of quality, of
diffusion\... That is why it is essential to create a completely open
platform, which does not depend on any company, whose main mission is to
defend freedom of expression and of the press. We must be able to group
videos regardless of their origin, and not be satisfied with a single
source, even YouTube. Miro seems very close to Mozilla Firefox in
spirit, is that intentional? Like the Mozilla Foundation, which finances
the development of Firefox, the Participatory Culture Foundation is
non-profit. The Mozilla Foundation gave us \$100,000 last May, and we
contribute to the development of Firefox. In addition, John Lilly, who
recently became CEO of Mozilla, is part of our board of directors. It is
therefore natural that there are similarities.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1290

INFOGRAMS. The former European champion of video game publishing has
just recruited Briton Phil Harrison as deputy CEO. The latter had
recently resigned from the position of president of Sony\'s game
development studios. INTEL. The price of memory chips will fall by 53%
in the first quarter, Intel has indicated to financial analysts.
Initially, the American firm was counting on a 27% price drop, which led
it to reduce its earnings forecasts. PARIS EUROPLACE. The association
bringing together major French banks and companies intends to
participate in international discussions on the consequences of the
subprime crisis and the recommendations to be implemented. MICROSOFT.
Three associations defending free software launched a petition yesterday
to end Microsoft\'s software monopoly in the European Parliament. Soon,
the European Commission must propose buying more free software.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1291

The Maison de Bourgogne in Orléans, a former chocolate factory
transformed into a cultural wasteland, is home to around forty
associations including Labomedia, which has just lost its ECM
(multimedia culture space) subsidy, along with 115 other places in
France. For over ten years, this program has been introducing the public
to technologies and supporting digital creation. More broadly, the
entire multimedia culture sector is being undermined, even if this aid
(from 5,000 to 30,000 euros) was derisory. Benjamin Cadon, a member of
Labomedia who has six employees, is also president of the very young
National Federation of \"multimedia culture\" actors formed following
the withdrawal of the Ministry of Culture. What are Labomedia\'s
activities? Two main areas: education (introduction to IT, image
education, use of software tools) and artistic production. We welcome
artists in residence and organize a free cross-disciplinary festival
every year, the Fête des 01, with concerts, installations and
conferences. We also run a recycling workshop where we collect old
machines on which we reinstall free software, people leave with a free
multimedia computer. What is the consequence of the removal of ECM aid?
It is our only recurring subsidy. This 20,500 euros is not much, but it
calls into question the fragile balance of the structure which was based
on this aid combined with some subsidies from the city and the regional
council, a little of our own income thanks to training and a little
employment assistance. The subsidy was our breath of fresh air for
support for creation. It allowed us to finance the festival, to invite
artists who approach technologies critically and to offer residencies.
We welcomed Bureau d\'Etudes and participated in the web development of
their new project Mapping the laboratory planet, presented in Berlin in
January at the Transmediale festival. The withdrawal of the Drac risks
leading to the withdrawal of other partners. What is the alternative? We
are being pushed towards a self-financing logic, American style. We will
be forced to only provide services, abandoning work with artists. This
calls into question the very reason for our association, unless we
transform ourselves into an SARL. We are also trying to look at the
private sector. But we support critical projects and patronage is
preferably focused on consensual proposals, rather than on emerging
practices. We are trying to push towards competitive sectors fields that
were not yet competitive: after energy, the Post Office, it is the turn
of Culture. We are trying to send small structures like ours back to
local authorities. How can we maintain the same independence if we are
funded by the City? The communities will ask us to do public events and
will hide our role as a laboratory, of questioning these technologies.
What do you hope to achieve by creating this Federation of \"multimedia
culture\" actors? To give us better visibility, to have our actions
recognized on a daily basis. We are preparing a Multimedia General
Assembly before the summer, to show that what we are doing is of public
utility and deserves subsidies. Our second project is to promote the
logic of co-production, the exchange of resources and skills between
structures.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1292

Brussels - The European Union has fined Microsoft a record 899 million
euros (\$1.3 billion) for imposing \"unreasonable\" prices on
competitors and developers who adapt software to make it compatible with
the Windows operating system until last October. The fine is the largest
ever imposed on a single company and the first time Brussels has
penalized a company for failing to comply with a ruling that it violated
competition rules. The Redmond-based American computer giant responded
immediately by stressing that the fine related to past problems that had
been resolved and that the company was now working according to new
principles to make its products more open. However, European Competition
Commissioner Neelie Kroes of the Netherlands stressed that the American
firm was under investigation for two other cases. Neelie Kroes said
Microsoft\'s actions had stifled innovation, causing inconvenience to
millions of computer users around the world. She called the fine \"a
reasonable response to a series of quite unreasonable acts.\" \"We could
have gone up to €1.5 billion (C\$2.2 billion),\" the European
Commissioner warned. On October 24, Microsoft announced that it had
withdrawn its last two appeals of the European Union\'s decisions
against it for violating competition rules. The American computer giant
thus withdrew its appeal of a €280.5 million (C\$411.75 million) fine
imposed on it by the European Commission in July 2006 for failing to
comply with an earlier decision on sharing information with competitors.
The data allows other software makers to adapt their products to the
Microsoft Windows operating system, which powers 95% of personal
computers. The group had also withdrawn an appeal against a Commission
decision ordering it to license some of its manufacturing secrets on an
\"open source\" basis.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1293

MICROSOFT The European Commission yesterday settled part of its legal
dispute with Microsoft by sentencing the American software giant to a
final fine of 899 million euros. This is the highest sum ever claimed
from a company by the Community competition services. This fine covers
the period from 21 July 2006 to 21 October 2007, during which the group
was still reluctant to comply with a 2004 decision ordering it to
communicate to its competitors, under \"reasonable\" financial
conditions, the technical information allowing them to interact with
Microsoft products. At the same time, the firm was ordered to stop the
tied sale of its Windows operating system with the Media Player
multimedia player. This injunction was already accompanied by a fine of
497 million euros. Ironically, this sanction comes a few days after
Steve Ballmer\'s solemn declaration that Microsoft is now committed to
making its products more open to the world of free software! New
procedures The simple adjective - \"reasonable\" - explained the
continuation of the saga. Initially, Microsoft had demanded that its
competitors pay a royalty of almost 3% for the income from licenses
giving access to secret information on interoperability. Too costly,
Brussels had considered. So much so that two years later, Brussels
considered that Microsoft was continuing to abuse its \"dominant
position\". On 21 July 2006, it imposed a second fine of 280 million
euros. But it was not until September 2007 and a decision by the Court
of Justice of Luxembourg condemning the IT group that the latter agreed
to revise downwards its financial compensation: access to its
information on interoperability, in particular, was offered, for a lump
sum of 10,000 euros which satisfied Brussels. \"Three years later,
Microsoft is respecting its obligations\", notes the Commission.
Yesterday, it was content to retrospectively sanction the inaction of
the American giant observed between July 2006 and September 2007. \"It
does so with all the more ease since it has been supported in the
meantime by the Court of Justice\", observed Olivier Cavézian, lawyer at
the Jones Day firm, in response to the questions raised by the
announcement of this record fine. \"We could have gone up to 1.5
billion\", estimated for her part the Commissioner for Competition,
Neelie Kroes. The Commission, which has since opened two new procedures
against Microsoft, remains ready to hit the wallet.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1294

A little disorder = a lot of profit(s) Éric Abrahamson and David H.
Freedman 314 pages Les Éditions Flammarion A giant like Microsoft has
always worked in disorder; even Hewlett-Packard and IBM have opened up
to the nonconformist culture of free software. When the FBI fails due to
too much organization, Schwarzenegger, chronically disordered, triumphs
on all fronts. How many scientific advances, great achievements are the
fruit of a prodigious disorder. Yes, disorder is profitable. \*\*\* Why
blog in a business context Collective 285 pages Isabelle Quentin Editor
On July 14, 2007, we celebrated the tenth anniversary of blogs. This
collective celebrates this anniversary, Ten Quebec business bloggers
recognized for their always relevant remarks take stock of the state of
business blogging. \*\*\* Knowing how to innovate as a team Sébastien
Beaulieu and Luc-Antoine Malo 156 pages Isabelle Quentin Publisher At
the dawn of this 21st century, if there is one thing that is certain,
only one, it is perpetual change. This book is for those who perceive
change as a stimulating routine. \*\*\* 50 home business ideas for those
aged 50 and over Gabriel Politis and Catherine Meilleur 336 pages Rudel
Medias Going into business instead of thinking about retirement? This is
becoming the new way of life of this century. With this book, those who
want to embark on the adventure of home-based entrepreneurship will know
how to choose the legal form of business that suits them, write a
business plan and a marketing plan, set up their workplace
professionally, take advantage of the Internet, manage and administer
their business on a day-to-day basis, etc. \*\*\* The Seven Missing
Pieces of Management Jean-Pierre Brun 200 pages Les Éditions
Transcontinental Business leaders tend to consider the well-being of
their staff as a secondary, even accessory aspect of their management.
The performance of the organization is their number one priority. What
they do not perceive is that the well-being of people is closely linked
to the productivity of the organization. \*\*\* Business Savoir-dire
Nicole Simard 147 pages Isabelle Quentin Publisher This book is intended
for anyone in the business sector whose activities lead them to
communicate both internally and with the company\'s many external
audiences.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1295

SOURCE CODE. This is the \"cooking recipe\" of software. In concrete
terms, the source code is a set of instructions written in a computer
programming language that allows you to obtain a program for a computer.
On the other hand, the technical documentation related to the software
does not allow you to know how it was written. It simply explains what
the lines of code do, but often in a fairly general way. OPEN SOURCE
SOFTWARE. This is software whose so-called free license gives everyone
the right to use it, study it, modify it, duplicate it, give it away or
even sell it. For this, its source code must be accessible to users,
even if they do not use it. The American Richard Stallman formalized the
notion of free software in the first half of the 1980s. He then
popularized it with the GNU project and the FreeSoftwareFoundation
(FSF). Most free software is free. LINUX. It is the kernel of a free
operating system. It governs essential functions of a computer operating
system such as access to the computer\'s memory or connections to the
network. It was initially developed by the Finnish Linus Torvalds, in
the early 1990s. It has since been enriched by the thousands of
developers who collaborate across the Internet. Some commercial
companies - such as Redhat, Mandriva or Canonical - sell operating
systems based on Linux but with additional features. INTEROPERABILITY.
It is the ability of a product or system whose communication elements,
called interfaces, are fully known, to work with other existing or
future products or systems. Interoperability is one of the pillars of
the Web: with it, anyone can, for example, create an Internet browser
that can communicate with Web servers.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1296

In general, Microsoft and openness are, unlike the Beatles\' Michelle,
\"words that don\'t go very well together.\" Except that, since
yesterday, most of Microsoft\'s trade secrets have been freely available
online. Arlesienne. When you are the world\'s number 1 software company,
when you have imposed standards that have become the norm for nine out
of ten computers in the world, you have no reason to make life easier
for the competition. In short, we couldn\'t care less about promoting
this Arlesienne of the interoperability of computer systems, the aim of
which is precisely to allow smaller creators to develop programs capable
of working well in the world of Windows. This vision, which Microsoft
staunchly defended until its condemnation in September by the European
Court of Justice, is officially obsolete. While everyone was expecting a
new offer from Microsoft to swallow up Yahoo, its CEO, Steve Ballmer,
surprised everyone on Thursday by announcing that he was going to give
free and more or less free access to the technical documentation needed
to implement third-party software with Vista, Office, etc. A sum of more
than 30,000 pages \"representing years and millions of dollars of
work,\" he explained. Documents that Microsoft had always refused to
reveal, even if some partners, for commercial reasons (Novell in 2006)
or security reasons (around sixty States) had been able to benefit from
a partial lifting of this \"software secrecy.\" From now on, these
\"APIs,\" which include many patented elements, can be used in two ways:
free of charge, Microsoft promises, for free developers not seeking to
sell their software. By paying royalties set at a \"reasonable and
non-discriminatory\" price for others, including \"open source\" players
who market paid services around freely accessible technologies. \"It all
depends on the purpose of the software,\" explains Bernard Ourghanlian,
director of technologies at Microsoft France, \"if it is for commercial
purposes, it is normal that this information is chargeable.\" An opinion
that is of course not shared by Frédéric Couchet of April (an
association promoting free software): \"This opening, forced by
Brussels, remains discriminatory for SMEs and SMIs compared to the big
players. It does not put an end to a contractual logic that is very
different from a royalty-free use of Microsoft standards.\" \"Octopus.\"
Microsoft says it: this is in no way a questioning of its model based on
the payment of licenses. But, faced with the spectacular growth of free
software in the professional world, the evolution of IT towards the
fully connected and new investigations by the European Commission, the
Seattle \"octopus\" has understood that it must adapt to preserve the
essential. Its position as the most profitable company in the world is
worth many concessions to the competition and to judges.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1297

In general, Microsoft and openness are, unlike the Beatles\' Michelle,
\"words that don\'t go very well together.\" Except that, since
yesterday, most of Microsoft\'s trade secrets have been freely available
online. Arlesienne. When you are the world\'s number 1 software company,
when you have imposed standards that have become the norm for nine out
of ten computers in the world, you have no reason to make life easier
for the competition. In short, we couldn\'t care less about promoting
this Arlesienne of the interoperability of computer systems, the aim of
which is precisely to allow smaller creators to develop programs capable
of working well in the world of Windows. This vision, which Microsoft
staunchly defended until its condemnation in September by the European
Court of Justice, is officially obsolete. While everyone was expecting a
new offer from Microsoft to swallow up Yahoo, its CEO, Steve Ballmer,
surprised everyone on Thursday by announcing that he was going to give
free and more or less free access to the technical documentation needed
to implement third-party software with Vista, Office, etc. A sum of more
than 30,000 pages \"representing years and millions of dollars of
work,\" he explained. Documents that Microsoft had always refused to
reveal, even if some partners, for commercial reasons (Novell in 2006)
or security reasons (around sixty States) had been able to benefit from
a partial lifting of this \"software secrecy.\" From now on, these
\"APIs,\" which include many patented elements, can be used in two ways:
free of charge, Microsoft promises, for free developers not seeking to
sell their software. By paying royalties set at a \"reasonable and
non-discriminatory\" price for others, including \"open source\" players
who market paid services around freely accessible technologies. \"It all
depends on the purpose of the software,\" explains Bernard Ourghanlian,
director of technologies at Microsoft France, \"if it is for commercial
purposes, it is normal that this information is chargeable.\" An opinion
that is of course not shared by Frédéric Couchet of April (an
association promoting free software): \"This opening, forced by
Brussels, remains discriminatory for SMEs and SMIs compared to the big
players. It does not put an end to a contractual logic that is very
different from a royalty-free use of Microsoft standards.\" \"Octopus.\"
Microsoft says it: this is in no way a questioning of its model based on
the payment of licenses. But, faced with the spectacular growth of free
software in the professional world, the evolution of IT towards the
fully connected and new investigations by the European Commission, the
Seattle \"octopus\" has understood that it must adapt to preserve the
essential. Its position as the most profitable company in the world is
worth many concessions to the competition and to judges.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1298

MICROSOFT COMPUTING. In the coming weeks, developers in the free
software world will have free access to key information on a large
number of Microsoft products. Last night, the CEO of the global software
giant, Steve Ballmer, cited the global responsibility of the company he
leads to explain a change of direction in its development strategy. By
announcing that he wants to facilitate the \"interoperability\" of
products with those of its competitors, Steve Ballmer will certainly
annoy the community of free software publishers, but also arouse the
skepticism of the European competition authorities. They have been
asking Microsoft to comply for years without success. As a first step,
30,000 pages of documentation on Windows will be put online for
developers.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1299

SOFTWARE. Microsoft announced yesterday that it would open up to the
OpenSource community and publish in the coming months tens of thousands
of pages of documentation for developers who want to create new services
connected to Microsoft products. ARCELORMITTAL. The steelmaker announced
a price increase in the second quarter, in response to the increase in
iron ore prices. The automobile industry is targeted by this measure.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1300

Finance Liechtenstein is resisting the tax evasion scandal from Germany.
The head of government, Otmar Hasler, said yesterday that he would not
communicate tax data on his taxpayers to Berlin and that he would
maintain the anonymity of his foundations. Two requests made Wednesday
by Angela Merkel, the chancellor. IT Microsoft is converting to \"open
source\". The American software giant announced yesterday that its
consumer products (Windows, Office) will now allow \"open connections\"
and promote \"data portability\". economic situation After the IMF on
Wednesday, the European Commission yesterday revised its 2008 growth
forecasts for France sharply downwards to 1.7%, compared to 2%
previously. This is well below the 2% forecast by Bercy. \"France could
be affected more than expected by the global economic slowdown\",
explains Brussels.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1301

Finance Liechtenstein is resisting the tax evasion scandal from Germany.
The head of government, Otmar Hasler, said yesterday that he would not
communicate tax data on his taxpayers to Berlin and that he would
maintain the anonymity of his foundations. Two requests made Wednesday
by Angela Merkel, the chancellor. IT Microsoft is converting to \"open
source\". The American software giant announced yesterday that its
consumer products (Windows, Office) will now allow \"open connections\"
and promote \"data portability\". economic situation After the IMF on
Wednesday, the European Commission yesterday revised its 2008 growth
forecasts for France sharply downwards to 1.7%, compared to 2%
previously. This is well below the 2% forecast by Bercy. \"France could
be affected more than expected by the global economic slowdown\",
explains Brussels.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1302

With his dreadlocks and his atypical appearance for the position he
holds, he is often presented as the coolest of the Ministers of Culture.
Appointed by President Lula da Silva in 2003, the famous tropicalist
singer-songwriter (an artistic movement initiated 40 years ago by major
artists such as Caetano Veloso) and Brazilian politician Gilberto Gil
demonstrates a clearly cybercultural vision. His openness to free
software, the access of poor communities to digital technologies that he
advocates and his vision of a copyright adapted to the digital
environment distinguish him from other Ministers of Culture on this
small planet. This is what we can conclude at the end of two days of
meetings and conferences by Gilberto Gil with Montreal intellectuals,
students, Brasilophiles and media representatives - at the joint
invitation of MediaMcGill and the Institute for the Study of Canada at
McGill University. During his meeting with La Presse, we obviously could
not avoid this question: what is the Brazilian point of view on
copyright in a digital environment? Gilberto Gil assures that Brazil
stands out from rich countries on this point: \"Since there is no
Brazilian multinational in entertainment or in the software industry, we
do not suffer the same pressure as the Americans or the Europeans. We
can think more about the development of the digital environment in terms
of civil society. Our perspective is therefore different.\" The
Brazilian Ministry of Culture and its government are also considering
implementing a new copyright law adapted to the digital environment.
\"To achieve this, we first intend to set up a forum where all the
components of our society can discuss this bill by expressing their
needs. We, in the government, will then be able to see what the best
balance will be between civil society, consumers, rights holders and the
market. We are giving ourselves a year to discuss it and reach a
consensus, after which a proposal will be made to Congress.\" Open to
free software as a \"tool for social and cultural development\",
advocating the widespread use of digital technologies to promote the
emancipation of local expressions, the Brazilian Minister of Culture and
his team are doing everything they can to give access to bandwidth to
all communities in their immense country. Since market forces primarily
serve the interests of content companies (entertainment and proprietary
software majors), Gilberto Gil believes that his ministry must do
complementary work. \"Our government must encourage the private sector
to adopt a more conciliatory position towards culture and creation. It
is therefore necessary for traditional actors to stop trying to protect
their territory from all the interference linked to new practices. In
this regard, Brazil has made some progress; our population understands
more these issues of the Internet and cyberspace. In this sense, 21st
century technologies represent a great challenge in regulation\", the
minister told his audience at the Society for Technological Arts
(Saturday). He thus seems to clearly prefer the establishment of new
business models to the fight against Internet pirates. In a more global
perspective, Gilberto Gil believes in the construction of a new
Pan-American identity based on diversity and the sharing of the cultural
heritage of the three Americas. And this new identity involves the
appropriation of digital technologies. \"That is why we created a
digital culture service at the Ministry of Culture. In this context, we
created programs for access to technologies such as the pontos de
cultura, which are access centers adapted to local communities. More
precisely, we give these communities the means to access the Internet
with audiovisual recording and broadcasting tools. These communities can
thus record themselves, film themselves, and report on new creative
energies. New autonomous networks then emerge.\" By the end of 2007,
more than 2,000 pontos de cultura had been set up in Brazil, not to
mention a few abroad. Within the next three years, Gilberto Gil hopes to
reach the milestone of 15,000 digital power points. \"The young people
in the communities,\" he proudly emphasizes, \"recognize themselves and
take ownership of these new tools of cultural performance. Social change
really began when they understood that cyberspace belonged to them.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1303

Sony Ericsson unveiled a new range of mobile phones at the Barcelona
Motor Show, the star device of which is the Xperia X1, a multimedia
smartphone with a 3.2 megapixel camera sensor, sliding QWERTY keyboard,
Wi-Fi compatibility and Windows Mobile software. The X1 offers the
classic multimedia functions of devices running Windows Mobile. It is
thus possible to watch videos, listen to music, view photos, etc.
Calendar, calculator and e-mail functions are also integrated. The
Xperia X1 also has an integrated GPS circuit and a large touch screen.
It is expected to be released in late 2008. ANOTHER FIREFOX 3 BETA
ONLINE Mozilla recently released the third beta version of its Firefox 3
browser. This new version offers security improvements to the
open-source browser, a new download module, better integration with the
graphical interface of Mac and Linux systems, and a tool that allows you
to add bookmarks with a single mouse click. The company warns, however,
that the beta versions of its browser are intended for advanced Internet
users, Web developers and the testing community. According to the
Mozilla website: \"The final version of Firefox 3 will be released when
we judge that the product is ready for our users.\" It is expected to be
released later this year. GOOGLE RELEASES AN IMPROVED VERSION OF GMAIL
Google has recently released an improved version of its Gmail e-mail
service. The developers of the American giant have made major changes to
the entire Gmail code base, in order to create a more flexible
environment that allows for greater flexibility in the interface and the
quick and easy introduction of new features. This version, which some
bloggers have nicknamed \"Gmail 2\", is already available in 37
different languages, including French. The migration between the two
versions is gradual and can take a few hours. Among the improvements, we
can note the introduction of colored labels, a better contact manager
and new, more efficient keyboard shortcuts.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1304

For or against voting machines? In France, where 80 cities, large and
medium-sized, will use this voting system for municipal and cantonal
elections, the question is not very mobilizing. After having tasted it,
cities like Saint-Malo (endless queues) or Reims (impractical machines)
have nevertheless abandoned this option. In Brest, a pioneer city in
this area since the 2004 regional elections, the debate is still
ongoing. Of course, it remains hushed and seems completely ridiculous to
the mayor (PS) François Cuillandre, who seems astonished that one could
ask the question and congratulates himself on the time saved by these
machines during the counting. For the Greens, the democratic if not
technical questions raised by electronic voting nevertheless still
deserve examination. The Ministry of the Interior has also set up a
working group which should evaluate their use after the elections.
\"First of all, there is a problem of opacity. We don\'t know what\'s
going on inside these machines, how they count, underlines Michel
Briand, a Green elected official and computer scientist. The source code
of the computer remains a secret of the manufacturer. Free software
encryption algorithms, today the most efficient, would allow better
control. For certain types of machines, there is also the question of
data cassettes that are brought back to a central location, which poses
the problem of their transport.\" The Brest Greens also consider that
voting and the time of counting are solemn moments that would merit
making the effort to mobilize citizens, even if this is becoming
increasingly difficult, rather than relying on machines. Another
complaint is the difficulties that some voters, such as the elderly, may
experience when faced with the electronic screen. In Brest, where
initiation operations have increased, this problem seems to have been
overcome. The question of the economy, particularly of paper, generated
by the machines also appears fallacious to Michel Briand, who calculated
that the ballot papers weighed no more than 5 g for 10 candidates
compared to 200 g of weekly advertising in his mailbox. This argument
will in any case become totally obsolete if, as the Green elected
official thinks, the current machines were eventually replaced by
printer machines that would allow a recount. He notes in any case that
in some countries, such as Ireland, electronic voting has been
completely abandoned or suspended, as in the Netherlands. \"There are
three manufacturers, and the machines that caused problems, particularly
with touch screens where you have to scroll through the candidates, are
different from those used in Brest, where all the lists appear on the
screen,\" they reply at the city\'s elections department. If Brest
wanted to limit the number of polling stations, it has in any case
failed. After going from roughly 100 to 80 desks, it was necessary to
buy other machines (5,000 euros each) to return to 98 desks in 2007.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1305

Bertone coachbuilder goes bankrupt INDUSTRY. After a few difficult
weeks, the Italian car group Bertone was declared insolvent yesterday by
a court in Turin. Its fate is now in the hands of three extraordinary
commissioners tasked with assessing the possible revival of the group.
Bertone, which employs 1,300 people, has produced virtually no cars
since 2005, while its production capacity is 50,000 to 70,000 units per
year. Orange wants to develop free software TELECOMS. Orange will join
the LiMo association to develop the free Linux operating system for
mobile phones, it announced yesterday at the World Mobile Congress in
Barcelona. It announced the launch, in 2008, of its \"first phone based
on Linux\". Degrémont treats wastewater from Halifax INDUSTRY.
Degrémont, a subsidiary of Suez Environnement, inaugurated yesterday,
with the municipal authorities of Halifax in Nova Scotia (Canada), the
first of three new wastewater treatment plants of the vast environmental
project Halifax Harbour Solutions. Located in Halifax, Dartmouth and
Herring Cove, these plants will allow to treat a total capacity of
640,000 m per day. Tension between ExxonMobil and Venezuela OIL.
Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez threatens to \"not send another drop of
oil to the empire of the United States\" in response to a possible
global freeze of the assets of the national company PDVSA (to the tune
of 12 billion dollars) on the basis of a recourse by the American group
ExxonMobil. The latter demands increased compensation for its withdrawal
from Venezuela. AIG plans new depreciations INSURANCE. The world\'s
leading insurer, the American AIG, will carry out new depreciations of
assets linked to subprime. Audit firm PricewaterhouseCoopers said the
insurer had \"a weakness in its financial reporting process\" regarding
the valuation of its credit derivatives portfolio. In its third-quarter
earnings release, AIG reported a \$149 million writedown. Fitch Ratings
is considering cutting AIG\'s rating by one notch from AA.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1306

André GorzEcologica Galilée, 164 pp., 25 euros. When he retraces his
journey, from his autobiographical novel, The Traitor, to his work on
political ecology, André Gorz of course cites Sartre, whose work was
\"formative\" for him, Marx, Ivan Illich, Jean-Marie Vincent or the
theorists of the \"critique of work\" such as Frithjof Bergmann, Moishe
Postone, or Robert Kurz. But, between two developments on the \"exit
from capitalism\", he unfailingly mentions the name of Dorine, his
partner, \"without whom nothing would be\". The publication in 2006 of
Lettre à D., histoire d\'un amour (Galilée) moved thousands of readers,
in that it expressed with force and modesty this very simple idea that
in the stormy crossing of life we only \"hold on\" if we hold on to
someone and if someone holds on to you. Lettre à D. ended with these
words: \"We would each like not to survive the death of the other. We
have often said to ourselves that if, by some impossible chance, we had
a second life, we would want to live it together.\" André Gorz was 84
years old, Dorine one year younger. They committed suicide together in
their house in Vosnon, in the Aube, on Monday, September 24, 2007.
Aliénation.Ecologica, which is published today, is not André Gorz\'s
intellectual testament. The volume brings together texts already
published in journals or earlier works but not very available. The
oldest (\"The Social Ideology of the Car\") dates from 1975, the most
recent (\"The Exit from Capitalism Has Already Begun\") from 2007, so
much so that they can be conceived as beacons or \"samples\"
representative of all the theoretical work, the axis of which has been
the defense of the freedom and autonomy of the individual. Also in some
articles we find the theses against economism, utilitarianism,
productivism, consumerism, the capitalist logic of the accumulation of
goods, the hyperbolic development of false needs, the \"maximization of
yields\", the \"techniques that violate biological balances\". But the
most interesting - Gorz devoted his last efforts to them - are the
analyses of the \"exit from capitalism\", which \"has never been more
current\". Analyses that may seem paradoxical, but which the European
left would do well to draw inspiration from if it wanted to propose an
\"other vision of the world\" instead of a weak political alternative.
Gorz does not simply question speculation, tax havens or the lack of
control of the financial industry. He shows precisely the reasons why
capitalism is proving \"incapable of reproducing itself\", and explains
why degrowth is a \"survival imperative\", assuming a radical break with
the logic of \"produce more, consume more\", which leads to the
alienation of man as well as the destruction of nature. Is a \"life
model aimed at doing more and better with less\" utopian? Not so much,
if we consider the \"knowledge economy\" that global computerization is
currently creating. This is not the private property of anyone, cannot
\"become a real commodity\", and is capable of producing wealth
\"intended to be a common good\". \"The grip of capital on consumption
is loosening, and consumption can tend to free itself from the market
supply. This is a rupture that undermines capitalism at its base. The
struggle between \"proprietary software\" and \"free software\" \[\...\]
was the starting point for the central conflict of the era. It extends
and continues in the struggle against the commodification of primary
wealth - land, seeds, the genome, cultural goods, common knowledge and
skills, constituting the culture of everyday life and which are the
prerequisites for the existence of a society. The direction this
struggle takes will determine whether the exit from capitalism will be
civilized or barbaric.\" We cannot summarize here the words of Gorz
(spring 2007), on what, created by capitalism, \"works towards its own
extinction\". In particular these \"tools of a kind of high-tech
craftsmanship\" - used to make prototypes or models such as digital
fabricators, factories in a box or fabbers(1) -, which \"make it
possible to manufacture almost any three-dimensional objects with a
productivity much higher than that of industry and a low consumption of
natural resources\", favor the creation of interconnected \"communal
workshops\" where everything a population needs would be produced,
prefigure an \"information society\" in which \"all human energy can be
spent on creative activities\" and where \"the market and commercial
relations\" would be replaced by \"consultation on what should be
produced\". We will also let Gorz discover his analysis of this
\"financial industry\" which \"produces nothing but \"creates\" money
with money, money without substance, by buying and selling financial
assets and inflating speculative bubbles\" whose development is ensured
\"thanks to speculative purchases of assets such as shares, shares in
real estate and land companies\". Some pages seem to be an exact account
of what happened with the subprime crisis or the so-called \"fraud\" at
Société Générale. \"Sufficient\". Until the end - since the time of Les
Temps modernes or the founding of Le Nouvel Observateur - André Gorz
will have been faithful to Dorine, whose tender closeness revealed to
him \"that it was not impossible to love, to be loved, to feel, to live,
to gain self-confidence\", and to a policy of freedom, to an \"ethical
requirement for the emancipation of the subject\", threatened with
becoming a thing among things or called to \"work more to earn more\".
He was heard too little. What he defended came, it was said, from the
land of Utopia. It is true that \"the idea of sufficiency - the idea of
a limit beyond which we would produce or buy too much, that is to say
more than we need - does not belong to economics or to the economic
imagination.\" (1) On the subject, André Gorz recommends consulting the
site www.fabbers.com.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1307

If completed, it will be the largest acquisition ever made by Microsoft.
The world\'s leading software publisher made public on Friday, February
1, an unsolicited offer to buy Yahoo!, the most visited portal on the
Web. Microsoft is ready to pay a fortune: \$44.6 billion (half in
Microsoft shares, the other half in cash). Yahoo!\'s management said on
Friday that it would \"evaluate the proposal carefully and
expeditiously.\" The offer from Microsoft, which has a colossal cash
position (\$21 billion as of December 31, 2007), seems very attractive
to the portal\'s shareholders, since it offers a 62% premium over the
value of Yahoo! shares on Thursday. Especially since the Internet
company has been disappointing them for several years now, with stagnant
growth and a stock price that has been falling steadily. The recall to
the bar in mid-2007 of Jerry Yang, co-founder of Yahoo!, is slow to bear
fruit: profits fell by 12.1% in 2007 compared to 2006. \"Together, we
will create more value for our shareholders and offer more innovations
to our customers,\" declared Steve Ballmer, CEO of Microsoft, on Friday.
He only mentioned Google\'s name once during his speech. However, it was
on everyone\'s mind. Because it is above all to counter the young
Californian company, which, in a few years, has given itself a dominant
position on the Web, that Microsoft is prepared to spend so much.
\"Google today controls the universe of online search and advertising,\"
according to Jennifer Simpson, of the Yankee Group firm. The group,
created in 1998 by two Stanford students, Larry Page and Sergey Brin,
captures between 30% and 40% of total advertising investments on the
Internet. Thanks in particular to a very popular offer with advertisers:
\"sponsored links\". Messrs. Brin and Page had the idea, in the early
2000s, to rely on the performance of their search engine to offer
advertisers the option of purchasing keywords. If these are the subject
of an online query, their commercial links are displayed to the right of
the responses to the queries. Microsoft has the \"MSN\" portal,
including an electronic messaging service (\"MSN Messenger\"), which is
very popular. This offer is financed, as in the case of Google, by the
sale of advertising space (sponsored links or more traditional banners).
But its search engine comes a long way behind Google\'s. And the
revenues generated are still insignificant on a group scale (4.7% of
Microsoft\'s \$51.12 billion in turnover in 2007). However, the \"epub\"
market could go from \"40 billion dollars in 2007 to 80 billion in
2010,\" Mr. Ballmer hammered home Friday. There is no question of
Microsoft depriving itself of such a windfall. In this perspective, the
acquisition of Yahoo! makes sense. In terms of online advertising
revenue, the portal has fallen far behind Google. But it has recently
invested heavily to get back in the race. It has released a new version
of its sponsored links sales platform (\"Panama\"). It has acquired the
company BlueLithium, considered a gem. \"This agency is the specialist
in behavioral targeting. Instead of, like Google, sending targeted ads
based on the queries made by Internet users, it bases itself on the
different sites visited by the latter,\" explains Laurent Geffroy, from
the specialist firm Greenwich Consulting. \"FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
THREATENED\" \"Microsoft and Yahoo! Both have very large user bases
thanks to their e-mail services. Both companies could take advantage of
this to launch into the development of \"social\" search engines,
exploiting the networks of Internet users, suggests Ms. Simpson. Mr.
Ballmer promised on Friday that the merger would generate \$1 billion in
savings per year. He insisted that the two companies would be able to
invest more in storage capacity if merged. Maintaining the relevance of
a search engine as the Internet continues to grow requires huge and
expensive \"farms\" of computer servers. Some were already looking
forward to seeing, on Friday, Microsoft\'s radical shift on the
Internet. Co-founded in 1975 by Bill Gates (who will leave the company
for good this summer) and Paul Allen, Microsoft symbolises the era of
the PC. The American publisher built its success by selling software in
the form of licenses. A very lucrative business model: Windows, its
operating system, still has a market share of over 90% on PCs and
generates a good portion of its profit. But this model is now threatened
by the rise of \"free\" software (which can be used, modified or
distributed freely). And by Google or publishers like Salesforce.com,
which rent the software, or transfer its use and are paid for with
advertising. The software is stored somewhere on the Internet and no
longer on the hard drive of PCs as is the case with Microsoft products.
Others also wondered, on Friday, about the difficulties that Microsoft
could encounter in absorbing a company with such a different culture.
\"This merger will create a duopoly that could threaten freedom of
expression on the Internet,\" denounced Jeff Chester, of the Center for
Digital Democracy, in Washington. Is Google in danger in the medium
term? Most specialists believe that the Mountain View company maintains
a comfortable lead in online search and advertising. It still devotes
most of its resources to it (Google had cash of \$14 billion as of
December 31, 2007), even though it has diversified considerably.
However, its managers are apparently aware of the danger. Is that why
they are hiring so much (the company has grown from 6,000 to 17,000
employees in three years)? \"When Google recruits an engineer, they say
to themselves: \'yet another one that Microsoft won\'t have,\'\" a
former manager of the group recently confided in California.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1308

They dress up as clowns to laugh at the powerful people of the G8. They
weave their web of counter-information on the thread of hacktivism. They
climb on the roof of the Medef to speak out against the unraveling of
culture. They multiply anti-consumer happenings to mock the society of
the spectacle of \"earn more to buy more\". They mock Françafrique to
better sketch the contours of an egalitarian North-South relationship.
They? New protesters, neo-disobedient, pioneers of an alter-world.
Rebels. Rebels. Lucid. Passers of ideas from one collective to another,
from shifting networks to ephemeral strategies, from impressionist logic
to avant-garde struggles. They have the breath of the heirs of 68
without claiming it. Examples\... Work \"More anchored in reality\"
Cathy, Precarious Generation \"We have collective affinities with 68.
But there is more flexibility in our collectives, more fluidity, more
derision too. We are less utopian, less idealistic, less duped, more
anchored in reality. We know that resistance does not go through
political parties or unions. But we are just as radical and subversive
as the 68 generation. Talking about interns in society means questioning
the use of serfdom in our system, which devours a docile workforce,
without rights, without a voice, without a face. It means refusing to be
a ghost. We do not invent anything, we borrow from other forms of
resistance, such as street theater, the ecological anarchism of the
English of Reclaim the Streets. Above all, we cross our ideas with
others. We take on the CRS during flash mobs, these lightning gatherings
in symbolic places, without throwing stones, with a smile. We launched
Black Thursday on the festive occupations of empty housing. We initiated
Germinal, an eco-collective that consists of planting seeds in the walls
of cities. We are aware of the powerlessness, but we do it anyway. I am
34 years old and I tell myself that it is that or put on an explosive
belt and blow yourself up in relation to the violence that today\'s
society reflects.\" INTERNET \"Power to all\" Frédéric Couchet,
Association for the promotion and research in free computing \"May 68
intended to put imagination in power. Like the free movement in
computing and, more generally, the control of knowledge. Against a
rent-based economy and monopoly that freezes innovation, the free
software for which we campaign at April (Association for the promotion
and research in free computing) intends to free knowledge and abolish
the technological and legal barriers in which some try to confine it.
The barrier between producer and consumer disappears, since each has the
software but also its manufacturing recipe, with the possibility of
adding their personal touch. In open source, power belongs to all, and
not just to a few. Free software democratizes knowledge by avoiding its
exclusive appropriation by multinationals. The free world also induces a
very profound cultural change in the way of working. To a hierarchical
and closed model operating in a vacuum, free software substitutes a
community model, based on cooperation and sharing. It is no coincidence
that the boom in free software went hand in hand with the
democratization of the Internet. The fantastic growth of this global
network has allowed an extremely simplified diffusion of knowledge. We
see it with a site like the free encyclopedia Wikipedia, which has
allowed people from all over the world to work together. It is the 1968
utopia of the free that has become partly a reality.\" Immigration
\"Breaking with the parties\" Frédéric Touchard, RESF \"I don\'t have
the soul of an activist. Very young, I felt that I would never be a
member. Around the age of 20, I took part in demonstrations against the
Creys-Malville nuclear power plant, for Larzac. That\'s about it. As a
documentary filmmaker, at the age of 46, I made a film about my daughter
and her relationship with a Guinean family. Another about Sangatte after
it closed. My films are not really activist. I try to make people think
rather than give my point of view. When the government started putting
children in detention centers, I told myself that we were touching on
something fundamental. After that, there are no more limits. Quickly, I
was asked to sponsor a family. She was an Ivorian, alone with two
children. Miraculously enough, she got her papers. Since September, I
have been sponsoring another one. Guineans. Of course, it is a minimal
commitment. Friends talk about \"commitment of a non-political mother\".
RESF will not generate a revolution. We do not propose a global social
project, we fight for specific objectives. This is typical of these new
commitments, very segmented. As in May 1968, we are breaking with the
party system.\" development \"We build from the bottom up\" Gus Massiah,
Center for Research and Information for Development \"As an
international solidarity association, the Center for Research and
Information for Development is a small speck in an alter-globalization
movement, which extends and renews May 1968. Because we integrate and
try to develop three dimensions. Social and workers\' struggles against
discrimination and inequality; the decolonization movement for the
emancipation of peoples; the quest for democracy, freedoms and equality.
And even the environment, which 68 had anticipated. What\'s new is that
we are trying to weave a network with movements from the South. By
refusing charity, subordination and domination. We are bringing about a
radical upheaval because we work differently. In space: local, national,
international. We cannot talk about migration, debt, poverty,
agriculture, transport or cities, corruption, without thinking through
its three dimensions. In time: there is urgency, as in 68, perhaps more,
but it is not humanitarianism that will tackle the structural causes of
underdevelopment. We are as impatient, as demanding as in 68. But we
want to propose credible alternatives, and we think that it is possible.
And that it is not by regulating the global capital market alone that we
will have access to rights for all. With the other international
solidarity NGOs, we are building a deep movement from below, not from
the surface. We are agglomerating, we are agglomerating, we are stirring
up ideas and concrete actions.\" ECONOMY \"Giving us limits\" Paul
Ariès, growth objector \"Nicolas Sarkozy proclaims his hatred of 68,
held responsible for the collapse of values and institutions. But would
there still be a particular meaning for the revolt-mongers that we are
to claim to be its heirs? May 68 no longer speaks to my students: at
least no more than 1936, 1848 or 1793, no more than the MLF. We are more
the grandchildren of 68 than its heirs since we must stand on tiptoe to
try to rise to the level of the 68 critique of productivism. As if the
society born since 68 had become deaf to the criticism of this entire
generation. As if we could be content to be nothing more than slaves of
work and consumption. Other slogans from 68 would have more difficulty
convincing or even making us dream today. The certainty of being able to
change our lives (under the paving stones, the beach) has been replaced
by the anxiety of the 1,000 euro generation of no longer even being able
to make a hole for themselves (on the paving stones, the homeless)\...
The ideal of unfettered enjoyment has been replaced by the harsh reality
that reminds us of what happens if we take ourselves for gods, if we
lose the ability to set ourselves limits (risky behavior, drug
addiction, global warming, depletion of resources, etc.). But isn\'t it
because we are rebellious children of this 68 that we are precisely its
heirs? Environment \"We are unraveling the system\" Thierry Baffou,
volunteer reaper \"Being in the lineage of 68 means breaking away from
the dominant model, from conventions. It means resisting and fighting
for future generations, to leave our children a planet other than the
one we are being sold today. For ten years, we have gone through all the
stages of civil disobedience on GMOs, a disinterested, collective,
open-faced struggle, in which we assume responsibility for our
non-violent actions. Legal appeals, petitions, demonstrations, mowing,
hunger strikes: our revolt is a textbook case. We can be called
obscurantists fighting against scientific \"progress\", but not all
science is necessarily a sign of progress. Yes to confined trials, no to
open-field cultivation. Long live the precautionary principle which, if
we had followed it, would not have caused scandals like contaminated
blood or asbestos. We have an informed opinion, without being convinced
that we hold the truth: we are not enlightened, we are determined.
Through the fight against genetically modified agriculture, we are
driving a wedge into the globalization that privatizes global public
goods, into the patenting of life that confiscates biodiversity. We are
unraveling the system. Being a reaper means saying that we do not want
the control of multinationals, it means denouncing the privatization of
the planet and the culture of profit for the benefit of lobbies.\"
HOUSING \"A breeding ground for revolt\" Augustin Legrand, Don Quixote
\"The heirs of 68? In the case of Don Quixotes, our action is different.
We start from something very specific, housing, with a legalistic
approach: we denounce the violation of a fundamental right, enshrined in
the Constitution, but violated for forty years. I don\'t know the events
of May 68 very well, but what surprises me is the vagueness about the
legacy of this struggle, the dichotomy between memories, the \"general
public\" image and the reality of social and political achievements.
Women\'s activism, for example, is passed over in silence. There is a
lack of awareness, a prism between reality and what we wanted to
remember, which today allows politicians to take shortcuts, to put
forward the image of hippies in the street rather than talking about
social progress. Today, the victory of struggles is linked to the
fragmentation of what we express. You have to be very legitimate,
campaign against specific things, to then pull the string and talk about
other problems: the suburbs, the disabled, the environment\... There is
fertile ground for a revolt: people are really bad, there is incredible
cynicism, we shit on human rights, but I sense a demobilization. At the
Canal Saint-Martin, there were 300 of us fighting while 4 to 5 million
people are affected by poor housing.\" Family \"Subversive desires\"
Martine Gross, Association of Gay and Lesbian Parents \"The homosexual
movement is an extension of May 68, with its global questioning of the
institutions of society, and therefore of the family: \"The homosexual
will have no homeland until the family unit and patriarchal society are
abolished,\" they said at the time. \"Families, I hate you, closed
homes, closed doors, jealous possessions of happiness,\" wrote André
Gide. We are far from the homoparental demands of the APGL (Association
of Gay and Lesbian Parents). The subversive \"revolutionary\" theses
have gradually given way to a \"reformist\" tendency to fight against
discrimination. And in the space of twenty years, mentalities have
evolved. They affect homosexuals themselves, who no longer feel shame or
the need to hide and give up starting a family. The traditional family
model is no longer the only model: divorce by mutual consent, blended
families, adoption and progress in medically assisted procreation
techniques (MAP) have multiplied the types of families. And today, it is
the child who makes the family rather than marriage. The child is more
than ever the future of the individual. There was no reason for
homosexuals to escape the desire to have a child. MAP techniques,
adoption or filiation linking a child to parents of the same sex, we can
speak of subversive desires. Revolutionary?

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1309

Nearly 1,500 publishers, booksellers, librarians and book specialists
have already signed the appeal for the book by Lekti-ecriture.com, in
response to the petition launched by Jeff Bezos, CEO of Amazon, to his
French customers, in order to defend free delivery of books in France.
If \"the Internet is a great opportunity for books, the establishment of
a vast monopoly on the online sale of books on the Internet, with
Amazon.fr, profoundly threatens cultural diversity\", believe those
responsible for the appeal. Among the signatories are notably the
publisher François Maspero, but also Richard Stallman, considered the
father of free software in the United States. The appeal is currently
being translated into English to be signed across the Atlantic. Editis
Perrin editions and Presses de la Renaissance, both subsidiaries of
Editis, have decided to join forces. As of February 1, Xavier de
Bartillat, CEO of Perrin, will chair the two publishing houses. Alain
Noël, CEO of Presses de la Renaissance, will become the literary
director. \"Each publishing house will retain its identity, but I want
to develop personal projects and found a monastery,\" explains Alain
Noël. The new entity will have a turnover of 12 million euros and will
employ around twenty people. Angoulême Attendance at the thirty-fifth
Angoulême International Comics Festival reached a record high with
nearly 220,000 entries, according to the general delegate Franck
Bondoux. A figure that can also be explained by the good weather and the
return of exhibitors to the city center. Bookstore A support system for
\"independent bookstores of excellence\" is being set up in the
Poitou-Charentes region. The first charters of the system designed by
the regional council, chaired by Ségolène Royal, were signed on Monday,
January 28, by twelve bookstores. The system provides for aid ranging
from 15,000 to 40,000. The region also provides aid for publishers for
the editorial project of 10,000 and for the promotion of 5,000 per year.
Television The strategic committee of the National Publishing Union
(SNE) studied, on Wednesday, January 30, the two reports commissioned on
the place of books on television. The one by Pascal Josèphe, from the
IMCA company, indicates that the number of programs devoted to books on
French television increased from 1999 to 2007, but that the audience
ratings over the same period fell sharply. As for the report by Ronald
Blunden (Hachette) on the success of certain programs abroad, it shows
that the programs of Oprah Winfrey in the United States and \"Richard &
July\" in Great Britain are followed by a popular audience and
underlines that the success of these programs is reinforced by the
reading clubs that are created around them. Trial The first hearing in
the lawsuit brought against the American search engine Google for
counterfeiting, by the La Martinière group, joined by the SNE and the
SGDL, is set for June 5, before the 3rd chamber of the Paris High Court.
Prizes Prix des Deux-Magots: Dominique Barbéris, Quelque chose à cacher
(Gallimard); Guardian prize, worth 10,000 pounds: Dinaw Mengestu, Les
belles choses que le ciel (Albin Michel); British booksellers\' prize:
Irène Némirovsky, Suite française (Denoël); Biography prize from \"Le
Point\": Patrick Lienhardt and Olivier Philipponnat, La Vie d\'Irène
Némirovsky (Grasset-Denoël); Alberto-Benveniste prize for literature:
Jean-Pierre Gattégno, Avec vue sur le royaume (Actes Sud); for research,
Béatrice Perez, Inquisition, pouvoir, société (Champion); Governor
General\'s Literary Award: Sylvain Trudel, The Sea of Tranquility (Les
Allusifs); RFI Witness of the World Award: Jean-Yves Loude, Coup de
théâtre in São Tomé (Actes Sud); Incorrect Book Award: Jean Clair,
Malaise in Museums (Flammarion); Version Femina Award: Metin Arditi, The
Daughter of the Louganis (Actes Sud); Saint-Valentin Award: Dominique
Mainard, I Wish So Much That You Remember (Ed. Joëlle Losfeld); Didier
Eribon is the winner of the James-Robert-Brudner Memorial Prize from
Yale University.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1310

Nearly 1,500 publishers, booksellers, librarians and book specialists
have already signed the appeal for the book by Lekti-ecriture.com, in
response to the petition launched by Jeff Bezos, CEO of Amazon, to his
French customers, in order to defend free delivery of books in France.
If \"the Internet is a great opportunity for books, the establishment of
a vast monopoly on the online sale of books on the Internet, with
Amazon.fr, profoundly threatens cultural diversity\", believe those
responsible for the appeal. Among the signatories are notably the
publisher François Maspero, but also Richard Stallman, considered the
father of free software in the United States. The appeal is currently
being translated into English to be signed across the Atlantic.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1311

\"With Soul Bubbles, we wanted to make a video game to have fun,\" says
Olivier Lejade, founder of Mekensleep (no kidding), a small Parisian
studio located in the heart of the Marais. The idea was to create
without setting limits, with our own conditions and working with whoever
we wanted.\" In a rapidly industrializing environment, this sounds like
a dream for most video game developers. But after a difficult first
attempt at video games (Ryzom, a persistent universe like World of
Warcraft, whose development was marked by a long series of pitfalls),
Olivier Lejade wanted to return to something simpler. This will be Soul
Bubbles, an innovative game that will be released in the spring on the
very popular Nintendo DS. In Soul Bubbles, you don\'t control a classic
hero, but a bubble. Which contains \"spirits\", which you have to make
sure are taken intact to the end of each level. And the path is
sometimes difficult: you have to blow on the bubble - well, by operating
the DS stylus\... - to make it move, make it bounce, split it to slip
into the narrowest spaces, make it grow or shrink to reach certain
passages\... New game mechanics, which Mekensleep has made very easy to
understand once you have the console in hand. And it doesn\'t stop
there, since the eight universes of the game will all contain small
gameplay changes. Surprise. In a market increasingly dominated by
sequels, remakes and other intelligence tests, the original and
different little game developed in secret by Mekensleep for three and a
half years is an excellent surprise. To get there, however, it took
time. It all started in September 2004, when developer Omar Cornut,
formerly of Atari, showed Olivier Lejade a very simple game prototype:
you can create bubbles and blow on them. \"I had wanted to work with
Omar for years,\" says Lejade. \"So when he showed me the prototype, I
thought it was the right time. We started just the two of us for the
first few months, improving the prototype and trying out ideas to make a
game around it.\" The small team took a gamble at the time on developing
their game for the Nintendo DS, which did not yet dominate the portable
console market, but which offered two small screens, including a touch
screen. This was a new development for Olivier Lejade, who was more used
to the world of PCs and multiplayer games on the Internet. To find
inspiration, he called on Frédérick Raynal, one of the most famous
French game designers, creator of several cult games in the 90s (Alone
in the Dark, Little Big Adventure). The trio worked for almost a year to
advance the concept, improve the good ideas and throw out the bad ones.
A \"very fruitful\" collaboration for Olivier Lejade: \"Frédérick has
all this culture of solo games that I don\'t have, and with his
experience, he allowed us to avoid a lot of pitfalls.\" Good ideas. The
small prototype then slowly begins to resemble a video game. But we\'re
not there yet. In the spring of 2006, while Frédérick Raynal left to
develop a new project for the French publisher Ubisoft, Mekensleep
begins to hire to strengthen his team: in total, there will be a dozen
working on the title. It is only in the spring of 2007, once the
technology is finished and the game mechanics finally stabilized, that
the game is really put into production: levels, graphics, music, good
ideas\... Everything has to be put together to finally transform Soul
Bubbles into a video game. Mekensleep will then spend the fall
correcting the small problems and having small groups of people try the
game, from the most experienced players to the most casual, in order to
make it accessible to everyone. In the meantime, Olivier Lejade has
taken advantage of all the trade shows to show his game. After long
negotiations, he signed Soul Bubbles during the summer. It will be with
the British Eidos, already publisher last year of the very good Nervous
Brickdown (Libération, March 23, 2007), produced by three people in
Paris in a few months. Eidos, which will take care of marketing and
shelf placement, should release the game in the spring almost everywhere
in the world. Last mission. But the game is not quite finished yet:
before entrusting its baby to Eidos, Mekensleep has a few days to polish
its title, to sand down the last little bits that stick out. For the
future, Mekensleep has no immediate project. But the company, built
around pillars of French free software, has one last mission to fulfill:
to publish on the Net (under a free license, therefore reusable by all)
the creation tools of Soul Bubbles. A practice of sharing that Olivier
Lejade holds dear. "And then," he sighs, "we can finally take a
vacation."

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1312

\"It\'s like a peace agreement,\" smiles Bertrand Delanoë in front of
Bill Gates, a few seconds before the signing of a digital partnership
between the City of Paris and Microsoft yesterday morning. It\'s
certainly a joke, because between the mayor of the capital and the
co-founder of the IT giant, the weather is good. The former is \"proud\"
to welcome the latter who \"has advanced knowledge, economic dynamism
and values\"\... and who multiplies the knowing smiles. Objectives of
the agreement signed at the City Hall: fight against social exclusion
and the digital divide first; then promote innovation. \"Not
understood.\" Concretely, it is about helping to return to work a
hundred people, unemployed IT specialists and young people who will be
introduced to the joys of IT by Microsoft. And to train digital
facilitators \"where the most excluded are welcomed\", according to
Delanoë, that is to say the Accommodation and Social Reintegration
Centers (CHRS). Another project, Porte de Montreuil, which mixes real
sport and console sport (Xbox, it goes without saying), was also
developed by the teams of Microsoft and the City of Paris. But Delanoë
admits: \"Bill Gates and I didn\'t fully understand what it was!\" On
the innovation side, 40 Parisian start-ups in the fields of digital
design and environmental protection will be supported each year,
compared to 20 at present. And Microsoft will provide advice, training
and international contacts. Always as comfortable in his role as a
salesman, Bill Gates was keen to point out that the 2008 edition of the
Imagine Cup would be held in July in Paris. Imagine Cup? A competition
organized by his company that brings together high school and college
students from around the world, who compete in nine \"digital\"
categories: software, video games, photos, etc. In short, solidarity,
innovation and fun. No cloud has come to darken this perfect
understanding, despite the questions of a journalist on Microsoft\'s
quasi-monopoly situation and the launch of a new investigation by the
European Commission, and the blow to free software by this partnership.
\"I maintain total independence in my orientations,\" declared Bertrand
Delanoë. I am also in favor of allowing the development of free
software.\" Future retiree. However, according to Maurice Ronai,
delegate for new technologies at the Socialist Party, this partnership
is a step backwards. \"It does not bring much to the City of Paris,
nothing to Bertrand Delanoë who is already known internationally, but a
lot to Microsoft which is suffering from a crisis of legitimacy,
especially in the public sector. Delanoë could have done without it!\"
With a rounded speech, Bill Gates specifies, as often, that many free
software programs run on Windows. Future retiree - he will no longer
have a full-time job from July 1st and will concentrate almost
exclusively on his foundation -, he proves once again that he knows
perfectly how to handle business and philanthropy.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1313

Bug Labs is a brand new company that has the distinction of having
marketed the first open-source electronic device in North America.
Called Bug, this device is in fact a series of small modules that are
assembled together, starting from a central module comprising a
processor, a battery, an internal memory and connection ports. The
intended use determines the modules that are going to be used: GPS
navigator, camera, internet tablet, anything is possible. And all this
is based on an open architecture powered by a modified version of Linux.
For Sunday tinkerers.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1314

New York - The big moves are accelerating in enterprise software, with
two big-ticket takeovers: the American group Oracle has finally managed
to get its hands on BEA Systems and its rival Sun has taken over MySQL,
the Swedish star of open source database software. After a firm refusal
in October, BEA Systems (software for managing and designing Internet
services) has finally accepted an offer from Oracle of \$19 per share in
cash. It will cost Oracle \$7.2 billion, once it pockets BEA\'s cash.
Oracle, the world\'s No. 2 in professional software, has resigned itself
to raising its initial price for BEA, from \$6.7 billion, to continue
its race to become a giant against its rival, the world leader SAP.
\"The combination of BEA\'s software will give us a leading position in
all levels of professional software, in more sectors and regions of the
world,\" said Oracle CEO and founder Larry Ellison. Over the past four
years, Oracle has spent \$32 billion to buy out competitors, with the
acquisition of PeopleSoft for \$10.3 billion in 2004, Siebel for \$5.9
billion in 2006, and Hyperion for \$3.3 billion in March 2007. The
acquisition of BEA allows it to respond to SAP\'s recent acquisition of
French company Business Objects for €4.8 billion (US\$6.8 billion). A
new front But like an unexpected attack, a new front is opening up for
Oracle in the lucrative database software market, a \$15 billion market
where Oracle reigns supreme with nearly 50% of the market, according to
market research firm Gartner. The Sun Microsystems group announced
yesterday the acquisition of MySQL, one of the most famous free (and
open source) database software companies, for \$1 billion. A price never
seen before in the emerging free software sector, whose business model
is still being debated. This is a logical choice for Sun, which for
several years now, unlike manufacturers of paid software, has favored
free software. It charges its customers for the sale of servers equipped
with this software, their maintenance and additional programs. Sun has
released free software such as OpenOffice, the free equivalent of
Microsoft\'s Office software, OpenJava or Solaris. MySQL, created in
1995, and its programming language PHP, is one of the most popular
database software in the world, adopted by many websites as well as very
large groups such as Facebook, Nokia or Google, and downloaded 100
million times. The group is also one of the most resounding successes in
the world of free software. If only because it is free, MySQL is a
dangerous rival for paid software like Oracle, which tried in vain to
buy MySQL in 2006. Sun pays for a customer base and a service, but not
for financial results: according to analysts, with its 400 employees
MySQL achieved a turnover of only 60 to 70 million US dollars last year.
Sun CEO Jonathan Schwartz considered it to be \"the most important
acquisition ever made by his group\" which will allow it to be \"the
platform at the heart of the Internet\". As with BEA, this acquisition
is a surprise, because until now MySQL CEO Marten Mickos had said he
wanted to introduce his group to the stock market rather than sell it.
The current poor health of high-tech stocks may have discouraged him.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1315

Yesterday was a busy day in the software world. The American group Sun
will acquire the Swedish publisher of free software MySQL for a billion
dollars. Sun specified that the sum is divided into two parts: 800
million in cash and 200 million in debt assumption. MySQL, which is
based in Uppsala in Sweden and Cupertino in California, employs 400
people in 25 countries. Its data management software has been downloaded
in 100 million copies. In the second quarter which ended in December,
Sun should have made a net profit of between 230 and 265 million
dollars, an increase of 100%.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1316

Brussels - The European Commission announced yesterday the opening of
new investigations against Microsoft for suspected abuse of a dominant
position, an accusation that has already earned the American software
giant a record fine. This time, the investigations concern, among other
things, the Office suite, containing the word processing software Word
and the spreadsheet Excel for example, and the Internet Explorer
browser. The opening of the investigations \"does not imply that the
Commission has proof of an infringement\", specifies the Commission\'s
press release. It followed up on complaints filed by the Norwegian
software manufacturer Opera as well as by the ECIS association, which
campaigns for the publication of technical information allowing the
greatest number of software programs to work with each other
(\"interoperability\"). Microsoft is accused of automatically
incorporating its Internet Explorer browser into its Windows operating
system, which equips more than 90% of PCs worldwide. Brussels also
indicates that it has been alerted to the incorporation into Windows of
\"other software products\" (Windows Live, Desktop search). The American
group is also reportedly refusing to disclose to its competitors
technical information that would ensure the interoperability of a \"wide
range of products\", including the Office suite and server products. The
Commission said it wanted to investigate in particular the
interoperability of the new file format implemented in the latest
version of Office launched last year. In March 2004, the Commission had
already fined the American group €497 million for abuse of a dominant
position, a penalty confirmed in September 2007 by the European Court of
Justice. After three and a half years of battle, Microsoft finally gave
in and gave up appealing the decision of the Luxembourg judges at the
end of October 2007. Brussels had notably obtained from Microsoft that
it market a version of Windows stripped of the Media Player multimedia
player, and that it provide better technical documentation on Windows to
its competitors, including designers of free software.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1317

\"With My major company, you too can become a music producer.\" No, this
is not the hook of a new board game for Star Ac\' fans. But that of a
new label that is trying to extend to a music industry in full
decrepitude the community and participatory wave already tested online
with encyclopedias (Wikipedia), journalism (Agoravox, Rue89, etc.), or
free software (Linux). Founded by two young entrepreneurs nourished by
Net 2.0 and coming for one from e-advertising and for the other from
music (where he first worked for majors), the site, which has just
opened, is betting on a model that is new in France. On
Mymajorcompany.com, it is up to Internet users to bet money on the
selected artists. The latter\'s counters remain open until they reach
70,000 euros, the sum required by the label to move on to the production
phase of the album, which will then benefit from a distribution contract
with a major. Inspired by the German site Sell a band, which claims to
have managed to raise the equivalent of 50,000 dollars (33,600 euros)
for 12 artists through this participatory production system, My major
company intends to produce and reveal up to fifteen \"new talents\" per
year. However, there is no question of letting Internet users decide
everything. \"Self-selection and self-production have their limits, even
on the Internet,\" explains Michael Goldmann, co-founder of the site.
\"Music is still a profession and so we are the ones who choose the
artists on whom Internet users can then bet.\" The same requirement is
used to justify the 70,000 euro mark. \"Below that, I don\'t know how to
do it,\" he continues. It is important that we can give ourselves every
chance of really breaking through artists.\" An important detail is that
the money bet on each artist is invested in \"safe financial
investments\" while waiting to reach the fateful threshold. The creators
of the site bet on an average stake of 20 to 30 euros per \"producer\",
to whom they agree to pay 30% of the net sales revenue, the remaining
70% being split between the artist (20%, better than a beginner\'s
contract with a major) and the label (50%). \"If an Internet user had
been able to bet on Artic Monkeys before they released their first
album, they would have become very rich, judges Michael Goldmann. Now,
we are not promising the moon to anyone. Above all, we offer our
visitor-producers good entertainment and if they win money one day, it
is a bonus.\" The company is also banking on a variety of community
tools (blogs, playlists, VIP clubs) to attract a wide audience. For its
beginnings, the site - which swears \"not to be a submarine of any
major\" and to rely on a 100% independent round table - remains modest
and is counting on one to two albums by the end of 2008 and no return on
investment for Internet users before 2010. Patience.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1318

You have long been a critical observer of Internet culture, what
significant changes have you seen? What fascinates me is the steady
growth of Internet users outside the West. Nearly 20% of the world\'s
population now has access to the Net, or 1.25 billion people, and more
than twice that number use mobile phones. The new users are in Asia,
Latin America, Africa and the Middle East. Large-scale educational
projects like \"One Laptop per Child\" are being initiated. Internet
users are not only consumers of information but potentially producers of
software. What interesting software is going to come out of Nigeria?
Look at how exciting the Iranian blogosphere is, despite the repression.
There is a democratization of access, from schools in remote villages to
\"Digital Jihad\". What is unfortunate is the way social movements are
lagging behind. The so-called global civil society has fallen asleep and
left all the madness of Web 2.0 to Silicon Valley. The Internet has
become \"social\" (but not yet \"socialist\"). The Net is used primarily
to connect \"living\" people and not so much to circulate \"dead\"
information. Social networks, such as Myspace, Youtube, Bebo or
Facebook, are gigantic hives, centered on language. Average users are
not obsessed with what is happening in the Anglo-Saxon sphere of the
Net. The Internet is a global medium, technically speaking, but there is
a growing balkanization, centered around different languages. Let us
just mention Japanese or Korean cyberspace. The strongest growth is in
the Chinese Net, literally walled off. But what do we know about what is
happening there? Within these \"islands\", a multitude of niche cultures
are emerging, what Chris Anderson, editor-in-chief of Wired magazine,
calls the long tail. Is the Web 2.0 craze any different from the dotcom
era of the late 90s? The biggest difference is the relative lack of
venture capital and corporate funding. Web 2.0 has been all the rage for
the past year, but it is nothing compared to the craze of the late 90s.
Back then, it was all about empty portals and dead e-commerce. Now, the
craze is all about user profiles that are sold to advertisers. We should
be concerned about these rampant violations of privacy, especially young
people who seem oblivious to how Google and Co make money. They think:
we have all these great services for free, so why worry? Nobody explains
to them what Web 2.0 business is. This "education" will not come from
hackers, activists and artists because most of them have a libertarian
attitude and fail to question this "ideology of free". You don\'t seem
to agree with it? Indeed, and I\'m not making myself very popular by
openly questioning the benevolent mentality of people like Richard
Stallman (free software activist, editor\'s note) and the followers of
Creative Commons (alternative to copyright, editor\'s note). We can\'t
demand that cultural producers give away their product, be it code,
research or music, for nothing, without offering them an alternative
economic model. Resistance to proprietary software is justified. But
what works for software doesn\'t necessarily work for music. Which
certainly doesn\'t mean we should return to the old regime of
intellectual property. You don\'t seem to share the euphoria of the
promoters of Web 2.0, you talk about a \"darkening of the Web\". I\'m
not a prophet of the Apocalypse. However, corporate and state control
over the Internet has increased like never before. In late November, the
data of 25 million people in the UK was lost in the mail, thanks to the
private postal service TNT. The data included names, addresses, dates of
birth, insurance numbers and bank account details of child benefit
recipients. It was stored on two CDs, protected by two passwords but not
encrypted. The package never arrived. This incident tells us something
about the collective dream state we are in (others call it organised
stupidity). The amount of private data that a company like Google
collects on us is unprecedented. It will get so bad that the only option
left will be to "nationalise" or "socialise" Google. Its profitability
will depend on collecting ever more precise user profiles. The internet
is a public digital domain in which our data is stored. It should not be
owned by states or companies. It is not as utopian as it sounds. This
could have already been implemented by international organizations such
as UNESCO. Unfortunately, these organizations have lost touch with
society and have become outdated bureaucracies, as we saw at the World
Summit on the Information Society in 2003 and 2005. What we need is a
strong and open European alternative to Google, a decentralized
knowledge structure, like Wikipedia, that works for the public good.
Another aspect of this \"obscuring of the Net\" is the hunting of users
of peer-to-peer networks. The new Sarkozy law will use surveillance
capacities in such a paternalistic way: the user is a naughty child who
is punished by excluding him from the Net. About the nettime list, Alex
Foti (Italian economist, member of the Chainworkers network against
precariousness, editor\'s note) wrote that it was the digital equivalent
of cutting off the hands of supposed thieves. Doesn\'t Sarkozy
understand that education simply can\'t happen without the Net? Your
latest book is called \"Zero Comment\". Why this title that refers to
the world of blogs? Zero Comment is what you find under most blog posts.
For me, it\'s not a sign of despair. I\'m not saying that blogging is a
product of our \"electronic solitude\". It\'s often a very social
activity, where we respond to each other and exchange links. We must
treat the Internet as a gigantic notepad, a distributed notation system
that can be accessed from anywhere. We should appreciate these
possibilities instead of always complaining about our own futility.
Besides, I like negative titles. I think it should be possible to
establish a tradition of the Walter Benjamin or Susan Sontag essay that
is not only critical but also technologically informed. Most literature
on information technology is corporate self-celebration, without any
critical investigation. You diagnose a nihilistic impulse in blogging
when others praise its emancipatory potential. We should be more relaxed
in our relationship with blogs. Blogging is nothing more than ordinary
people entering into a dialogue with the media. It is a revolutionary
step. But from a content perspective, it has proven to be a tragic joke.
Let\'s not separate blogging from other trends in society! If you are
not ready for the trivialities of everyday life, then avoid blogs!
Miraculously, blog software invites users to confess. Thanks to Michel
Foucault, we know that people today believe that their liberation
requires them to "tell the truth," to confess to someone, a priest, a
psychoanalyst, or a blog, and telling that truth will set them free.
There is a strong desire for transparency. We are bad at keeping our
secrets, and digital technology makes this tendency toward
self-revelation easier than ever. Saying out loud what you think or
feel, in the legacy of Sade, is not just an option, in the liberal sense
of choice, but an obligation, an immediate impulse to respond in order
to be there, among the others. The nihilistic aspect comes into play
when we try to make sense of these billions of messages. From a
centralized perspective, they simply no longer have any meaning. They
destroy the need for a global vision and drag media culture toward zero
(nihil). Let us not confuse this nihilism of the advanced media age with
the collapse of religious influence on daily life in the 19th century.
After God, it was the media that gave meaning. They are, in turn, about
to die. Blogs are only accelerating this historical process. In this
transparent society, will we perhaps one day dream of having a quarter
of an hour of anonymity? Anonymity is a bourgeois dream, coming from an
age when people claimed that they \"had the right to be left alone\".
Literally, this means not having a name, but these days, it means rather
not having a face, not leaving digital traces. With today\'s
surveillance systems, anonymity is nothing more than a nostalgic notion.
Hackers are right when they say that privacy no longer exists. It is a
depressing thought that revolts me. Anonymity is no longer an absolute
value, and has never been a human right. You write that blogging leads
to decadence? Blogs break down centralized structures, in the same way
that alternative media did in the past. In decades past, the independent
underground press was on the side of the progressives, but that is no
longer the case. In the United States, most blogs are pro-conservative.
In Holland, it is the shockblogs that dominate, populist sites that
insult the liberal left consensus. The mass media are constantly
scrutinized from all sides, from all sides, by the right, Muslim
activists, Christian fundamentalists and all the conspiracy theorists
concerned about 9-11. Bloggers claim to be citizen journalists, but you
dispute that they really challenge the traditional media. Do blogs
produce critical information or just a nebula of micro-opinions? As the
Internet and society merge, we cannot expect a simple software program
to change power relations. Blogs provide us with an easy-to-use
information architecture. Whether blogging, as a collective effort, is
subversive, or whether it merely reproduces existing power relations,
cannot be decided outside the context of the times. Technologies do not
realize social movements, which I always consider to be the engines of
change, they can only shape them. Amateur culture is being challenged.
Do you agree with author Andrew Keen that \"the Internet is killing
culture\"? I have always analyzed, with great pleasure, the cultural
pessimism that the Internet arouses among intellectuals. The problem
behind this fear of \"information overload\" is technological: we can no
longer distinguish written culture from oral culture. Our oral culture
is now recordable. Instead of writing less, we write more and more text
messages, emails, and blog posts. But what we are really doing is
storing fragments of our spoken conversations. The result is an
avalanche of half-finished, grammatically incorrect sentences that are
digitally archived and searchable. The problem with Keen is that it
treats these informal data streams as journalism or even literature.
Many bloggers have the same problem. They don\'t distinguish between
online dialogue, digital entertainment, and news production. To them,
everything becomes news, simply because it is tagged. Take the most
popular blogging topic, cats. People love to blog about their cats, but
they don\'t pretend it\'s news. Should we stop blogging? Never!
Technorati lists over 100 million blogs, or just under 10% of the
Internet population. Why stop when it has just begun? Blogging is a mass
leisure activity that only emerged in 2003-2004. Blogs will be replaced
by new platforms, closer to the users\' lifestyle. If there were less
alienation in sight, we could hope to see a decrease in the need for
electronic communication. But the human condition is not very bright.
With increasing mobility and working hours, the need for
\"computer-mediated\" communication will only increase. Only the rich
can stop communicating. They have their slaves who do it for them. The
rest, those who cannot afford not to answer their cell phones, will have
to stay connected and blog in anger, fear and outrage. Being online is
their status of \"modern nervousness\", as Freud put it.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1319

Our final judgment (for now) on a few trends, phenomena and other
not-so-important things. Things we love and want more of in 2008 Moving
to Panama That was the plan of John Darwin, the English canoeist who
\"miraculously\" resurfaced five years after his disappearance. And
it\'s apparently also the plan of a growing number of North American and
European retirees, who are choosing the small Central American country
for its low cost of living, its health care system and the fact that it
doesn\'t tax income earned outside the country. Perfect for Brian
Mulroney. The return of handmade and artisanal goods, and its diffusion
on the Internet Apostatizing André Montmorency\'s apostasy caused a stir
in 2007. But why stop at the Catholic religion alone? Other things to
consider for 2008: using a BlackBerry, plastic water bottles,
paraben-laced products, and watching Loft Story. Making babies Everyone
seems to be doing it these days, and apparently not just because
there\'s nothing good on TV. The fight for a fair and equitable
copyright law for everyone Because the public has rights too. More
reasons not to have a car More bike paths, Communauto vehicles,
carpooling services like Amigoexpress, etc. Good podcasts Taking a
sabbatical In 2007, Timothy Ferriss (The 4-Hour Workweek) explained how
to work only half a day a week. For 2008, we say: let\'s follow the
reasoning to its conclusion and take a sabbatical. Free Internet Free
software, wikis, newspapers like the New York Times that decide to offer
their content for free online, etc. Interest in where the food we buy
comes from, and how it was produced. Cities without advertising São
Paulo, Brazil, imposed a total ban on all forms of outdoor advertising
in 2007. Montreal? We can always dream. TV on the web Collective
projects Because unity is strength, of course. The social web as a
democratic tool Blogs, Facebook and the like are revealing their
formidable social and political potential. And it\'s also very practical
for inviting people to your party, of course. Box-office hits produced
with a handful of dollars and a lot of resourcefulness. Undyed hair
Permanent retirements Rather than the lousy comebacks of Bran Van 3000,
Spice Girls, Led Zeppelin, etc. Rebelling Against the government, the
media, multinationals, your phone company. Things we really hit our
quota for in 2007 The \"lifestyle\" centers DIX30, Centropolis, Faubourg
Boisbriand and all the others: the same businesses everywhere, the same
windy steppes, the same desire to never come back. TV shows hosted by
comedians In the past, being a TV host was a job in itself, with its
specialists, its techniques, its expertise. Nowadays, it\'s a contract
that you give to an actor/singer/comedian whose career is going well.
Main offenders, in 2007: Serge Postigo, Luck Mervil, Christian Bégin,
Boucar Diouf. Serge Postigo Deserves a category all to himself, really:
the cultural show on Télé-Québec, the renovation show on Historia, the
musical comedy, the finale of L\'heure de gloire, the romantic breakup.
We suggest a sabbatical year. With Jean Lemire, if possible. Minority
governments Ugly kangaroos Sweaters, not Australian mammals (which are
never ugly). Loud charity So, well-known personality, you gave a charity
the fee for your ad for the equally well-known rotisserie? You could
have just sent a check and spared us the ad. People who send us links to
disgusting videos like 2 Girls 1 Cup You\'ll tell us that we just
didn\'t have to click. We\'ll tell you that it\'s like telling the hare
that it just didn\'t have to bury its head in the snare. The crowds on
the orange metro line, since the opening of the Laval stations.
Discussions on reasonable accommodations Exile has never seemed so
tempting. Discussions on the eventual, possible, conceivable
disappearance of French in Quebec around 2127 See Discussions on
reasonable accommodations. Journalist bloggers whose posts consist
mainly of questions like: \"And you, what do you think?\" Easy way to
fill your daily quota of posts without having to rack your brains. The
advertising bombardment during prime time The same ad during every
break, it\'s starting to resemble the torture of gout. The abuse of
status updates on Facebook We didn\'t really want to know that \"X no
longer has clean panties\". The theft of metal Stories of sports doping
Yawn. Radio-Canada television Boxing galas? The Têtes à claques? The
Grandes gueules? A daily for Sébastien Benoit? We\'re going to go back
to the internet, if you don\'t mind.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1320

New York - The community search engine Wikia Search was officially
launched yesterday and was already the subject of strong criticism, with
its detractors seeing this new platform mainly as an additional social
networking site. This highly anticipated search engine, which aims to
compete with the leader Google, is a project designed by James Whales,
co-founder of the online community encyclopedia Wikipedia and head of
Wikia, a (for-profit) portal dedicated to the creation of thematic
communities of knowledge. The Wikia search engine currently exists in
its test version and is accessible at the address
http://alpha.search.wikia.com/. The software architecture of the site is
open to the Internet community, thanks to its \"open source\"
technologies. In addition to the search engine, the Wikia project also
offers the possibility of creating your own personal page and including
the classic content of social networking sites (photos, interests,
etc.). \"We\'ve been working for the past year to create the foundation
for today\'s open-source platform,\" Wales said in a statement. \"We
believe Wikia will improve with use and contributions.\" But skepticism
was rife among niche websites, with some criticizing the lack of
meaningful ranking of keyword search results. \"Many of us have been
waiting a year for Jimmy Whales\' new, user-powered system to tease
Google. But the test site is probably one of the biggest disappointments
I\'ve ever written about,\" TechCrunch\'s Michael Arrington reported.
The project is just \"another social networking site\" that offers
\"basic search options\" to set it apart, he continued.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1321

The first time his name circulated in Paris was at the République des
blogs. The meeting has become a quasi-institution, for all the political
bloggers and citizen journalists on the French Net. In a Parisian café,
or more recently in the provinces and in Belgium, those who usually only
debate in the virtual world, without seeing or really knowing each
other, have gotten into the habit of meeting up for a drink once a month
in real life. \"Ken McKenzie is coming to France soon,\" one of them
whispered. McKen\... who? Kenneth McKenzie Wark, the author, in 2004, of
Hacker Manifesto (A hacker manifesto for the French translation). The
guru of hackers, software players and free culture. Some see him as
\"the Karl Marx of the 21st century.\" This announcement could not leave
bloggers indifferent. Direction Marseille, at the end of October 2007,
where Kenneth McKenzie Wark is expected. He is taking part in a
conference: "Hackulturation, free culture, hacker culture", organised by
Les Rencontres place publique, an association that brings together
French and foreign intellectuals around political, sociological and
aesthetic questions on art. In one of the alcoves of the Centre de la
Vieille Charité -- a place originally intended to shelter vagabonds and
orphans -- Kenneth McKenzie Wark is indeed present. Dressed in black,
with long hair, a large silver fly on his index finger and a distant
gaze. He was born in Australia forty-six years ago, in Newcastle, a
coastal and working-class city of some 200,000 souls, in New South
Wales, 160 km north of Sydney. "A city that you leave without shame and
without regret," he says. He studied media at the University of Sydney
and Murdoch University. An activist in the Australian Communist Party,
he remembers demonstrating against the end of free higher education. The
event is not insignificant for this man who has become one of the
thinkers of free culture. His bedside book is a collective work, the
encyclopedia Wikipedia, the symbol of information finally liberated. \"I
left Australia at 30, but I should have done so at 20 when my dream of a
multicultural, progressive Australia faded, having definitively turned
its back on its racist history. When it was clear that the left had
lost.\" He followed his American wife to New York, where he settled in
2000. Since 2004, he has been a professor of culture and media at
Eugene-Lang College The New School for Liberal Arts in New York. It was
in the United States, while reading The Society of the Spectacle
(Gallimard, 1992) by Guy Debord, that the inspiration for the manifesto
came to him. He considers the theoretician, one of the founders of the
Situationist International, to be a \"Karl Marx hacker\". He remembers,
as a young student, having attended a conference by the French
philosopher Jean Baudrillard. He was struck by the great freedom of mind
of the latter, and the \"great freedom of his references\". McKenzie\'s
manifesto was one of the philosopher\'s last favorites, shortly before
his death in March 2007. His manuscript was rejected by many publishers,
before being published by Harvard University Press. Hacker Manifesto has
been translated into eight languages, and was released in France in 2006
by Criticalsecret. The manifesto, printed in 400 copies, contains 389
aphorisms. \"It is an epic and conceptual poem\", according to Aliette
Guibert, its editor. \"A beautiful, dense, energetic, exciting book\",
for the philosopher Patrice Maniglier. Return to Marseille. The small
vaulted room of the Vieille Charité is sparse. There are computer
science teachers, counterculture and free software players,
\"hacktivists\" of all kinds. A heterogeneous and turbulent public,
characteristic of the computer underground, at the crossroads of the
shady worlds of the network and a radical artistic avant-garde. In other
words, the worlds where the first hackers recognized themselves, in the
sense that McKenzie Wark gives to the term. Not pirates, but
\"dismemberers, bloodhounds of universes, laborers of abstraction, both
the wreckers and the innovators\". Those who, he explains, in his very
particular language produce, invent new concepts, new perceptions, new
sensations \"hacked\" from raw data. A kind of Robin Hood of the digital
age. \"Whatever code we hack,\" the author continues, \"whether it is a
programming language, a poetic language, mathematics or music, curves or
colours, we are the extractors of new worlds.\" The hacker is the one
who \"frees information from the vectors in which it is locked up and
held hostage,\" explains art critic Stephen Wright, a close friend of
McKenzie. While the Australian often quotes philosophers, he also
mentions Courtney Love\'s rebellion against American record companies,
or the initiative of the group Radiohead, which offered each buyer the
right to set the price of their latest album. \"Information can be free
everywhere, but it is chained everywhere,\" summarizes Kenneth McKenzie,
in reference to the credo of cyberculture of the 1980s. In McKenzie\'s
universe, Debord and Robin Hood rub shoulders, Rousseau and Courtney
Love, the computer scientists of the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology and the English peasants of the 8th century opposed to
enclosure, Baudrillard and Kathy Aker, an American experimental
novelist. The theory of the author, who defines himself \"as a
crypto-Marxist\", draws the boundaries of a new class struggle, digital
society version. On one side, therefore, the hackers, proletarians of
information. On the other, the ruling class composed of the owners of
the vectors who \"lead an intense fight to dispossess the hackers of
their intellectual property\". \"An interesting theory as a post-Marxist
vision of the exploitation of man by man\", summarizes Paul Mathias,
professor at the International College of Philosophy. He edited the
issue of the magazine Rue Descartes (PUF) which devoted a file to the
Hacker Manifesto. In the United States, Kenneth McKenzie Wark has
already published another work: Gamer Theory. A copyright-free book, put
online, developed interactively with Internet users. A true fruit of
hackers.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1322

CAMBRIDGE, Mass. \-- An MIT professor\'s One Laptop project is
struggling as Intel and Microsoft offer their own products. In 2005,
Nicholas Negroponte had a brilliant idea that, if implemented, would
narrow the technology gap between rich and developing nations. The idea
was captivating and simple: Design a \$100 laptop and get it to as many
of the world\'s 150 million schoolchildren in poor countries as possible
within four years. World leaders and corporate benefactors have
enthusiastically supported the nonprofit One Laptop Per Child project.
Negroponte, a Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) professor who
was on leave of absence, traveled the world to gather commitments from
developing countries to buy the laptops in large quantities. But some
three years later, only about 2,000 schoolchildren in pilot programs
have gotten laptops through the One Laptop project. An order from
Uruguay for 100,000 computers appears to be the only solid deal struck
so far. Mr. Negroponte\'s plan has been thwarted in part by the power of
his idea. For-profit companies threatened by the \$100 price tag have
rushed to build their own low-cost computers, throwing Mr. Negroponte
into unexpected competition with big-name brands like Intel and
Microsoft\'s Windows operating system. But a variation on Mr.
Negroponte\'s vision is beginning to come to fruition. Poor countries
are getting their hands on low-cost laptops for their students \-- but
most of them have nothing to do with his project. Poor countries now
have a choice of affordable computers, potentially undermining the One
Laptop Per Child, or OLPC, initiative. Goal Achieved \"I\'m good at
selling ideas, but I\'m not good at selling computers,\" Negroponte told
colleagues. \"I think if the world\'s poorest children have the chance
to have 30 million laptops from competitors by the end of next year,
it\'s a huge success,\" he said in an interview. \"My goal is not to
sell laptops; OLPC is an educational initiative.\" Since its inception,
One Laptop Per Child has posed a challenge to the dominance of software
giant Microsoft and chipmaker Intel in the personal computing industry.
Negroponte\'s team, which included MIT members, designed a device
without Windows or Intel chips. The computer runs the Linux operating
system and other nonproprietary, free software that users can modify.
Last year, Intel, which does not typically sell computers, introduced a
small laptop for developing countries called Classmate, priced at \$230
to \$300. It has mounted a major advertising campaign, despite the fact
that the initiative is unlikely to generate much profit. That is because
Intel is hoping to prevent its rival, Advanced Micro Devices (AMD),
which supplies Mr. Negroponte with chips, from becoming the standard in
emerging countries. The OLPC laptop comes with good educational
software. The small, energy-efficient green-and-white device is
waterproof and dustproof. Its single, high-resolution screen remains
bright even in direct sunlight. The computer also has a built-in video
camera and wireless Internet connectivity. Still, the \$100 target price
is hard to hit, although Negroponte\'s team has managed to create a
device that costs less than other laptops. It now sells for \$188, plus
shipping. Questioning Some potential buyers are starting to question the
One Laptop Per Child. Officials in Libya, which had planned to buy up to
1.2 million units, have become concerned that the computers lack the
Windows operating system, and that technical support, teacher training
and future upgrades could be problematic. \"The Intel device seems
superior to the OLPC,\" says Mohamed Bani, who chairs Libya\'s technical
advisory committee. \"I don\'t want my country to become a huge
scrapyard for these devices.\" Libya has decided to buy at least 150,000
Intel Classmates. Nicholas Negroponte unveiled plans for his \$100
laptop in January 2005 at the World Economic Forum in Davos,
Switzerland. Google, AMD and News Corp. were among the companies that
each invested \$2 million in the project. \* \* \* An alternative
Because of mounting sales problems, the decision was recently made to
offer the device to American consumers. On November 12, \"pairs\" of
laptops began to be offered to American and Canadian buyers for \$399.
Under the program \-- Give One. Get One \-- one computer is given to a
schoolchild in a poor country, such as Haiti, while the other goes to
the buyer. \* \* \* In Direct Competition A nonprofit and a tech giant
race to market a low-cost laptop JANUARY 2005: Nicholas Negroponte
presents the idea of a \$100 computer for schoolchildren in poor
countries at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland NOVEMBER
2005: (Above) United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan presents a
prototype of the laptop at the World Summit on the Information Society
in Tunis, Tunisia MAY 2006: Intel CEO Paul Otellini gives the first
public demonstration of the company\'s Classmate computer prototype at a
technology conference APRIL 2007: Negroponte predicts that three to five
million laptops will be sold in 2007 at an analyst conference in
Cambridge, Massachusetts and 50 to 150 million devices by 2008 July
2007: Intel joins the board of directors of One Laptop Per Child
NOVEMBER 6, 2007: Mass production of One Laptop Per Child computers
begins

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1323

Olivier Blondeau (with the collaboration of Laurence Allard) Becoming
Media, Internet Activism, Between Defection and Experimentation Editions
Amsterdam, 389 pp., 19 euros. All Internet users? All journalists? All
commentators? The rise of the Internet and the new practices it
generates have until now been examined from an essentially sociological
angle. Beyond the hymn to novelty, a certain disdain has been shown
towards this pseudo-media whose most visible result remains for the
moment a flood of invectives and/or banalities. Olivier Blondeau\'s
essay has the immense merit of showing that something essential is at
stake with the Internet: the emergence, in place of the passive viewer,
of singular individuals acting as such in the common space of the media.
What he calls the production of \"new subjectivities\", no more, no
less. Become the Media is a song by Californian eco-punk rocker-activist
Jello Biafra. After having joyfully taken down reality TV stars, the
lyrics (more than music, they are \"spoken words\" recited with
background music) launch an appeal that resonates like a challenge to
the small world of media criticism: \"We don\'t hate the media, we
become the media.\" Becoming the media, the expression would have
pleased Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari, who saw in the concept of
\"becoming\" (becoming-minority, becoming-woman) the way out by which
the individual would escape his determinations (family, historical) and
access his freedom, his truth, his desire - to become, therefore, a
\"subject\". It is by placing himself under the double sponsorship of
American radical rock and the authors of Anti-Oedipus that Blondeau
elaborates his argument. Which can be summed up in a thesis: in the
media space, becoming a subject means appropriating the media, making
oneself media. This was already the meaning of the free radio movement,
local television and activist films in the 70s. Today, \"becoming
media\" would mean, pell-mell: setting up sites, building \"free\"
software, downloading, podcasting, broadcasting videos, exchanging in
P2P, creating discussion lists, putting archives online, establishing
links, syndicating blogs, copying, pasting, sampling, but also drawing
up a map of the Wi-Fi hotspots in one\'s neighborhood, clowning around
in front of video surveillance cameras, inviting the inhabitants of a
region to discuss online the route of the future national road.
\"Experimenting with new languages to produce new subjectivities, new
causes and a new political perspective.\" One figure serves as a common
thread in Olivier Blondeau\'s thinking: the hacker, capable of cracking
codes, of wandering unhindered on the Web, of leaving his mark there, of
inscribing his subjectivity (which is as much an impression as an
expression). \"The hacker is \[.\] the incarnation, the ideal type of
this expressivism.\" At the crossroads of technology and politics,
Blondeau shows the link that unites the militant \"defection\" of the
90s and the advent of Net-activism: mobilizing, which seemed to have
lost its reason for being in traditional modes of action (unions,
parties, etc.), becomes possible again with the Internet, where the
articulation of the individual and the collective changes. Because the
Internet is above all \"communication\", the \"I\" and the \"we\" are
not contradictory, but call upon each other. From then on, acting on the
Internet means producing a \"social reality\" where everyone will define
their \"relationship to the world\". Far from being a gadget for
politicians in search of a marker of modernity, the Internet appears as
a powerful factor of democratic innovation, of rewriting the public
space. It is therefore an eminently political reading of the Internet
that this book proposes. The references illustrate the scale of the
project: Michael Hardt and Toni Negri (in particular their concept of
\"becoming-common\"), Félix Guattari (the \"postmedia\"), Michel de
Certeau (for his distinction between tactical activism and strategic
activism), Gilbert Simondon (his analysis of the technical object, which
has not aged a day) and even Teilhard de Chardin (whose \"noosphere\"
has become, forty years later, the favorite metaphor of Internet users
to represent \"the Web\"). We regret (in addition to a proliferation of
technical terms and a botched edition) that, focused on activism,
Blondeau forgets that a \"subject\", in philosophy, aspires first to
enjoyment and that in this respect the Internet resembles a cornucopia.
Enjoyment of seeing, of being seen, of writing, of being read, of
exhibiting oneself, of spying: \"becoming media\", is it not also a way
of finding a consistency, a content, a unity? The book makes too many
quick allusions to it, and one is surprised to think that, faced with
the stars of Net-activism - Deleuze, Guattari, Negri -, a little Lacan
would not have hurt.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1324

NEW YORK - Netscape Navigator, the world\'s first commercial browser and
the launching pad for the Web\'s rise, is set to disappear for good
after Feb. 1, 2008, after a 13-year run. Its current custodian, Time
Warner\'s AOL division, will then shut down all development efforts and
cease providing technical support, focusing its energies on growing as
an advertising company. Netscape Navigator\'s popularity plummeted when
Microsoft launched its own browser, Explorer, and it has all but
disappeared with the arrival of its open-source cousin Firefox. Netscape
CEO Tom Drapeau admitted in a blog post Friday that AOL\'s best efforts
have not allowed Navigator to regain the ground it lost to Microsoft.
For several years, Navigator has essentially been a slightly modified
version of the wildly popular Firefox, which currently controls about 10
percent of the market. Users will be able to continue downloading
Navigator indefinitely, but no updates \-- security or otherwise \--
will be offered after February 1. The Web was only a few years old, in
April 1993, when a team at the National Center for Supercomputing
Applications at the University of Illinois released Mosaic, the first
browser to incorporate images, sound and words. Before Mosaic, access to
the Web was primarily text-based, with images presented in separate
windows. Several members of that team went on to found their own
companies, and the first version of Netscape Navigator was launched in
late 1994. Netscape was among the first to cash in on the virtual gold
rush with its initial public offering in August 1995. Its opening stock
price \-- \$28 \-- doubled on its first day, and a company that had only
had sales of \$20 million ended up with a market capitalization of \$2
billion. Netscape\'s success, however, caught the attention of
Microsoft, which began including its own browser, Explorer, with its
Windows operating system.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1325

Fighting the West, of course, but where? The answer given by the
historical gurus of al-Qaeda has varied over time. The movement\'s great
leaders have even disagreed on various occasions over the strategy to be
deployed: defensive jihad in the land of Islam (dar al-Islam), on Afghan
soil for example, or offensive jihad in the land of conflict (dar
al-harb), taking the sword to lands populated by infidels. After
failing, in the 1990s, to overthrow a single \"corrupt\" Arab regime,
the \"near enemy\", al-Qaeda will find more success - at least in terms
of the media - by attacking the \"distant enemy\", in New York, Madrid
or London. Today, it clearly intends to lead the fight on both fronts,
but with a recent refocusing on \"apostate\" Muslim countries. If Iraq
and Afghanistan remain the main fronts, several speeches by Ayman
al-Zawahiri, the number 2 and ideologue of the terrorist organization,
set as a priority target the interests of Western countries that support
\"felonious\" Arab states, whose borders are an insult to the
mythologized Umma (community of believers). The carnage in Algiers on
December 11, like the quadruple murder in Mauritania, seem to show that
the message has been well received, in the Maghreb and throughout the
sub-Saharan strip. This impulse from the \"top\", initiated by the
leadership of al-Qaeda, is dangerously responded to by a movement from
the \"bottom\" of a number of Islamist groups or small groups. Indeed,
we are witnessing a \"Qaedization\" of Islamist movements almost
everywhere - and particularly in the Maghreb. Weakened by the blows
dealt by local security apparatuses, prey at best to divergences on the
direction that the fight should take and at worst to bloody internal
dissensions, these terrorist organizations find a certain interest in
placing themselves under the banner of al-Qaeda. A \"brand\" that
unites, legitimizes, and gives to the least of their actions - even
minor - an international sounding board. We have seen, since 2006, the
successive rallies of the Maghreb movements, Algerian GSPC, Moroccan
GICM, Tunisian GICT and Libyan GICL last month. \"The fact that leaders
like al-Zawahiri are increasingly talking about Maghreb groups shows
that, through their actions, they have shown themselves \"worthy\" of
belonging to the movement,\" comments Dominique Thomas, a researcher at
the EHESS (School for Advanced Studies in the Social Sciences). This
race for the \"Qaedization\" certificate worries Western intelligence
services to the highest degree. They are thus expecting a resurgence of
attacks against their nationals - expatriates or tourists - in Muslim
countries, from Nouakchott to Islamabad. With a whole range of actions
ranging from the meticulously planned attack to the opportunistic and
amateur action. In the first case, massive attacks like the one that
killed 11 French people from the DCN company in Karachi in 2002. In the
other, spontaneous and poorly prepared acts against Westerners chosen at
random, as was undoubtedly the case in the Mauritanian desert on Monday.
\"The The comparison may be shocking, but it works the same way, in a
negative way, as when the Pope calls on everyone to do charity at
Christmas, explains a specialist in anti-terrorism. An association could
carry out a major operation while an individual could make a gesture of
his own accord. And Zawahiri made his \"wishes\" on the occasion of Eid
a few days ago, calling for foreigners to be attacked wherever possible.
A structured group could carry out a major attack, while three more or
less amateur militants could take a knife or a rifle and go and massacre
two or three foreigners.\" In his \"Call for Global Islamic
Resistance,\" a sort of 1,600-page encyclopedia of jihad published on
the Internet in 2005, Abu Musab al-Suri explained that al-Qaeda \"is not
an organization and should not become one,\" but that it is a \"call, a
reference, a methodology.\" Each day that passes confirms that al-Qaeda
does not operate as an organization but as an \"open community
network,\" similar to those at the heart of the Internet today. The new
al-Qaeda militants resemble, in their sad way, geeks (computer
enthusiasts), working together to develop and perfect free software. The
difference is that they are building a work of death. A researcher at
IFRI (French Institute of International Relations), Mark Hecker recently
spoke on this subject in Le Figaro of \"wikiterrorism\" (our editions of
November 9), in allusion to collaborative networks, such as Wikipedia or
YouTube. The response, as we can see, will not be easy. \* Senior
reporter in the Foreign Service of Le Figaro.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1326

The Conservatoire national des arts et métiers (CNAM) is organizing, as
part of a series of conferences on practices in innovation marketing, a
debate on the originality and evolution of economic models in the free
software sector, on Thursday, December 20, from 6:15 p.m. to 9 p.m., at
the Ecole nationale supérieure des arts et métiers - Ensam - (75013
Paris). Free admission upon registration. Information: www.cnam.fr

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1327

The Ministry of Economy, Finance and Employment has joined forces with
the Ministry of Health, Youth and Sports to open a portal aimed at
promoting careers in social work and health. Fact sheets describe the
skills and training required, places of work, pay, etc. The site also
provides information on schools, competitive examinations, validation of
acquired experience, etc. Young graduates too A quarter of graduates
from Audencia, the Nantes business school, believe they have been
victims of discrimination during recruitment, and 41% have witnessed
such practices towards other graduates of leading grandes écoles,
according to the Agence emploi formation (AEF). These results from a
study conducted by two Audencia research centers among 450 former
students are included in a \"White Paper on Equal Opportunities in the
Grandes Écoles\", published on December 12 (www.audencia.fr). The
economy of free software The Conservatoire national des arts et métiers
(CNAM) is organizing, as part of a series of conferences on practices in
innovation marketing, a debate on the originality and evolution of
economic models in the free software sector, on Thursday, December 20,
from 6:15 p.m. to 9:00 p.m., at the Ecole nationale supérieure des arts
et métiers - Ensam - (75013 Paris). Free entry upon registration. 45
minutes to refine your project The Paris City Hall and the Salon des
entrepreneurs are organizing the second edition of the Conseils
d\'entrepreneurs, on Tuesday, January 29, 2008 at the Hôtel de ville de
Paris. The objective is to allow 1,000 people who want to create their
own business to meet 100 business leaders. They will be able to talk
with SME bosses or group directors. Progress for women The 3rd session
of the Club Mixité et égalité professionnelle, presented by the National
Association for the Interdisciplinary Promotion of Research in Human and
Social Sciences for Businesses (Anvie) will take place on January 31,
2008 from 2:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. at the Cercle républicain (75002
Paris). The discussions will take stock of the role of women\'s
networks, the persistence of stereotypes and obstacles to equal pay\...
Find the right training The 12th edition of the Studyrama Forum for
Bac + 4/5 will be held on February 8 and 9, 2008 at Espace Champerret
(75017 Paris). Universities, business administration institutes, and
specialized schools will present more than a thousand training offers.
The Association to facilitate the professional integration of young
graduates (AFIJ) will advise students on career opportunities in the
fields, the sectors that are hiring and the recruitment stages\...

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1328

Do new technologies have an impact on the methods and strategies of
companies? For the Internet guru Don Tapscott, they are completely
disrupting them. A site (1) invites us to extend the debate in a
collaborative way. You say that the collaborative economy or
\"wikinomy\" constitutes a mutation of the same type as the industrial
revolution in the 19th century. Under the impact of globalization and
new technologies, an old industrial model is disappearing and a new one
is emerging. What is disappearing? An organization of the production of
wealth in companies based on hierarchy, control and a vertical
transmission of tasks in which everyone is someone\'s subordinate: the
employee in relation to the manager, the seller in relation to the
consumer, the producer in relation to the distributor or subcontractors.
What is emerging? New collaborative models that rely on communities and
are based on co-production and co-creation of wealth. How are these
networks revolutionizing the economy? They are no longer limited to what
was called at the turn of the 21st century the \"new online economy\".
They are no longer used only to produce content, such as the Wikipedia
encyclopedia, or software, such as the free Linux operating system.
Networks are revolutionizing entire sectors of the economy, in the
automobile and aeronautics industries, medical research and the
pharmaceutical sector, cosmetics, etc. We can thus create mutual funds,
produce new games or cheap motorcycles in China. This co-production
model will become established everywhere. An example of a concrete
application of \"wikinomics\" in a company? It was the story of a mining
company managing a gold mine in Canada that gave me the idea to write a
book. Its name is Goldcorp, and at the end of the 90s its deposit seemed
exhausted, its closure inevitable. Its young boss, Rob McEwen, who had
just attended a Linux conference in Boston, then had a crazy and risky
idea. He decided to publish all of Goldcorp\'s top-secret geological
data on the Net, and invited a thousand virtual prospectors on the Web
to find new extraction \"targets\" by promising them half a million
dollars. In a few months, this open-source method made it possible to
find more gold than Goldcorp had ever dreamed of and to save two to
three years of prospecting. McEwen had entered this \"wikinomy\" that
tomorrow will generate innovation and the production of wealth. This
sharing of intellectual property is considered by many to be one of the
worst threats weighing on the company. The received idea is that you
have to preserve this precious asset at all costs and send a battalion
of lawyers as soon as you touch it. Hide your game to stay competitive,
in short. But that doesn\'t work anymore. The major record companies are
dying from sticking to this model, and everywhere the old monopolies in
industrial knowledge are collapsing. I\'m not saying that we should
share everything, but at least some of our intellectual property. Take
the case of IBM. This is a structured multinational that estimates that
it has saved 900 million dollars \[about 625 million euros, editor\'s
note\] per year by giving up - in part - its systems and betting on
relying on free software produced by others. But this requires adopting
new mental models and exploring new avenues in the search for value
creation. Consumers, whom you rename \"prosomers\", also participate in
this movement of co-creation, co-production. It is the advent of a fifth
estate, that of Internet users! Amazon makes nearly 30% of its turnover
via a million third-party sellers paid on the Internet. BMW invites its
customers to participate in the interior design of its models. But the
most spectacular example is that of Lego, converted into high-tech
games. Launched in 1998, the Mindstorms experiment, which consists of
giving users the possibility of designing their own robots online with
programmable bricks, was such a success that Lego extended it to its
more classic kits. These customers no longer buy Lego models, but their
own models, accessible to all. Doesn\'t this new, outsourced business
model signal the end of a model that had the merit of organizing work
socially? If you mean that we are moving towards a riskier world, that
anyone disconnected and resistant to this \"wikinomy\" will not survive
it in the long term, yes. Everything is converging in this direction.
But it is also a world in which opportunities are multiplied. I want
proof that companies that have opened up to these models are more
successful. Web 2.0 is already outdated, in short. This collaborative
economy goes beyond the current boom in online social networks. We are
going to move from a world of networking on the Web, of new online
sociability, to a social and collaborative production. Companies have an
interest in preparing for it now. (1) www.wikinomics.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1329

The French will be deprived of the Eee PC, the first computer at 300
euros, for Christmas! We will have to wait until January to see this
machine built by Asus on the gondola heads of French distributors. The
Taiwanese firm has succeeded in miniaturizing it without causing
manufacturing costs to explode. This ultraportable weighing less than 1
kilo will, however, make North Americans happy. They have ranked it
among the most sought-after items for Christmas, according to the
specialist site cnet.com. Equipped with a small 4 gigabyte hard drive, a
7-inch screen and, above all, a Linux environment, the Eee PC connects
in two clicks to any open Wi-Fi network. The pre-installed free software
allows all forms of communication: email, messenger, IP telephony and
even videoconferencing thanks to the integrated webcam. A set of office
tools makes it a complete workstation. The Eee PC can do everything a
big one can do, minus the comfort\... but for a lot less money.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1330

Superflex is setting up its \"Supercopy\" workshop at La Box in Bourges.
The Danish artists are the initiators of \"Free Beer\", the first \"open
source\" beer and Copyshop, a shop in Copenhagen that only sells
\"modified originals, improved copies\" and any product \"that
challenges intellectual property\". Opposed to copyright, which is
considered counterproductive, Superflex advocates the free circulation
of ideas and knowledge. At 6 p.m., the plagiarists will stamp
counterfeit Converse and imitations of designer clothing with their own
logo: three screen-printed \"Supercopy\". These copies of copies will be
exhibited alongside documents and videos on the culture of \"free\" and
Creative Commons (non-exclusive web copyright), in order to continue the
discussion on intellectual property. La Box, Ecole nationale supérieure
d\'art de Bourges, 9, rue Edouard-Branly, tonight from 6 p.m. until
January 5. www.ensa-bourges.fr; www.superflex.net

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1331

Can you build a profitable business model based on a free software
license (open source, as they often say)? That\'s the question asked
last week by two well-known Montreal lawyers in the field of ICT
(information and communications technology). Both are increasingly
concerned that the \"viral effect\" of free software could harm the
success of this approach. For many small IT companies, developing free
software is an advantageous way to distinguish themselves from larger
companies. This is understandable: it allows them to draw on the work of
other developers, without having to pay for development that would
otherwise be far too costly. On the other hand, these companies must in
turn comply with the free software license (the most widespread being
the famous GNU General Public License, or GPL, which is now in its third
version). Now, one of the most important principles of this license is
that it requires you to offer your own work freely, if it includes bits
taken from other free software. This could seriously affect the
profitability of companies hoping to make a living from this activity!
Gathered at a conference of the Centre d\'entreprises et d\'innovation
de Montréal (CEIM), several developers came to hear the two Montreal
lawyers take stock of the issue. According to Ingrid Dirickx, head of
communications for the CEIM, many are concerned about the fact that
subsidies granted for software development are also increasingly slim.
\"The government insists that we must develop the ICT sector, but at the
same time, subsidies are becoming rarer,\" she says. Marc A. Tremblay is
a technology law specialist for Ogilvy Renault. He does not hesitate to
say that free software is a disruptive phenomenon for a majority of
companies. \"In the 90s, it was rather marginal. Today, most of them
deal with free software,\" he says. But their managers are not
necessarily aware of it. \"According to a survey conducted in the United
States last year, more than 40% of American software companies have
published their own code without management\'s knowledge.\" This is why
Mr. Tremblay believes that free software is well on its way to stealing
significant market share from \"proprietary\" software, the kind that
you have to pay for, such as Microsoft products, for example. Exactly.
\"Microsoft makes \$20 billion a year with only two software programs,\"
adds the lawyer. \"For them, every percentage of market share lost is
very important.\" We won\'t hear anyone complaining about the American
IT giant. In the case of an SME whose revenues are a little less, let\'s
say, astronomical, it\'s more delicate. For those, Me Tremblay
recommends taking a look at IBM and MySQL, which have developed a
\"hybrid\" business model. The American multinational supports a free
operating system, Linux, as well as other free software of the same
type. However, last year, for the fourteenth year in a row, IBM filed
more patent applications than any other company in the United States.
This means that it can benefit from open source and proprietary
software. \"Free software is a challenge for software companies. In my
opinion, we are going to see more and more (business) models like this
one,\" concludes Marc A. Tremblay. After-sales service His colleague
Jacques Lemieux fears that companies do not have perfect control over
their product, which could harm them when it comes to seeking financing
or, even worse, when negotiating with their customers. \"With the advent
of open source software, companies don\'t always have control over their
freelancers or subcontractors,\" says the renowned technology lawyer.
For example, you have to try to make sure that the client won\'t go and
solicit your employees to employ them later to provide technical support
for the newly installed software. Which, when the software isn\'t sold
at a high price, is indeed more than risky.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1332

From the top of the enormous amphitheater of the Docks, in Saint-Denis
(Seine-Saint-Denis), a myriad of laptops turned on catches the eye.
Roughly, one in two spectators surfs, updates their blog, fills a photo
gallery, uploads a video. On stage, the speakers discuss the Web, social
networks, micro blogging or design. For its fourth edition, Le Web3, a
kind of G7 of the Internet that has been held since yesterday in
Saint-Denis, saw things on a grand scale: nearly 2,000 people, from 40
countries, are gathered in three large rooms. The first hosts the
conferences. A tight sequence of debates and \"keynotes\", a conference
by one person on a specific subject, between fifteen and forty-five
minutes maximum. Among the speakers, Karlheinz Brandenburg, who
participated in the creation of the mp3 format, and Joi Ito, investor
and star blogger addicted to the online game World of Warcraft.
\"Networking\". The second room is dedicated to \"networking\", or, in
approximate French, \"networking\". This is probably the main motivation
of the majority of participants. To know and make oneself known. We talk
about financing, business plans, audience monetization and other
necessarily rosy and lucrative future prospects. Cédric Malloux,
director of the start-up AllPeers which develops an extension of the
free Firefox browser, is happy to be there: \"I live in Prague, and it
is difficult for me to know the players of the European Internet. Here,
it is the ideal place to meet people.\" In a very cozy setting, project
presentations and sales speeches follow one after the other, always on
state-of-the-art laptops. Enough to delight the organizer of the event,
Loïc Le Meur. The former Internet advisor to candidate Sarkozy during
the presidential campaign recently went into exile in the United States
to set up a start-up, Seesmic. Obviously enthusiastic about the
motivations and the course of his event, he explains, with restraint:
\"We are changing the world, participating in the creation of a new
economic sector, making the world bigger.\" Less optimistic, Kevin Rose,
the founder of the site digg.com, is convinced of the return of the
Internet bubble: \"It is different, but it really exists. Today,
start-ups are not entering the stock market in large numbers, but there
are huge investments in projects that are of no interest. Within five
years, many of the companies present today will no longer exist.\"
Competition. Moreover, the third room of Web3 is hosting a \"start-up
competition\", where 33 companies present their concept one after the
other, with the hope of attracting venture capitalists. Centered on an
Internet that is lulled by fundraising and financial valuation, the
atmosphere of this first day at Web3 has a very business-oriented tone.
Enough to make some skeptical. As Tristan Nitot, president of Mozilla
Europe, who runs Firefox: \"What\'s a bit of a shame is that we\'re not
going to talk much about free software on Web3. While everyone uses it.
But that\'s not a problem: the main thing is that free software is
useful. The important thing is not the glitz and the shine.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1333

Entrusting Denis Olivennes, CEO of Fnac, with a mission on illegal
downloading is like asking Michel-Edouard Leclerc for a report on the
future of mass distribution. Nicolas Sarkozy found nothing wrong with
this choice by the Minister of Culture and Communication, Christine
Albanel. He even eagerly adopted the anti-piracy system imagined by Mr.
Olivennes. The scene took place on November 23 at the Elysée, where
professionals in the sector were ratifying an agreement for the
development and protection of cultural works and programs on new
networks. The head of state decreed general mobilization against piracy.
He had summoned three ministers for the occasion, for the economy,
culture and justice, and was surrounded by the cream of French creators:
Patrick Bruel, Didier Barbelivien, Jean Reno, Christian Clavier and a
few others. Nicolas Sarkozy wants to be their protector, in the face of
what he calls \"shoplifting\": peer-to-peer file sharing. The future is
bleak for artists. CD sales have collapsed. Film piracy is increasing,
facilitated by high-speed and soon very high-speed connections. The very
foundations of the cultural economy are shaken, as were the steel and
textile industries. The comparison with these industrial disasters is
from Nicolas Sarkozy during the presidential campaign. It is pertinent
but double-edged. It gives little hope to the major record and film
companies of overcoming the crisis, unless they invent a new business
model. This is what Denis Olivennes and the head of state do not want to
hear. They believe in the sustainability of yesterday\'s economic model.
In any case, they act as if they believed in it. They know how much
piracy has become a habit, but they are convinced that by discouraging a
percentage x or y of offenders, the music industry will avoid the worst.
The system imagined by Denis Olivennes draws lessons from the current
law on copyright and related rights in the information society. This
DADVSI law, from August 2006, is not applied because it is inapplicable.
It punishes Internet pirates - who number nine million in France - with
three years of imprisonment and a fine of 300,000 euros. The penalty is
so disproportionate that the chancellery had to send a circular to the
public prosecutor\'s office to invite them to be lenient. In other
words, not to apply the law. The Olivennes system will not replace the
DADVSI law, but it plans, with the help of Internet service providers,
to identify and punish offenders. A first warning message. A second.
Then, if that is not enough, the suspension of the Internet user\'s
subscription. Finally, for the most stubborn, termination. All under the
control of the National Commission for Information Technology and Civil
Liberties, an \"independent\" body to be created, and the judicial
authority. To justify this system, the CEO of Fnac explains that in the
countries where it is used, 70% of fraudsters give up after the second
warning. Is this the right solution? Ingenious, certainly. Effective, we
will see: French pirates are proportionally more numerous than American
and British Internet users. And more undisciplined. Natives of the
digital world, convinced of their rights, they live in a world where
free (or its appearance) is taken for granted. This habit, acquired from
a very young age, weakens the anachronistic agreement signed at the
Elysée. The gold of the presidential palace, where it was ratified,
evokes the \"old\" economy, the managed economy, the era when the State
ruled cultural policy. Malraux, the ORTF. The ENA, where Denis Olivennes
comes from. As its name indicates, the World Wide Web makes light of
borders and national regulations. Internet users feel at home there.
They consume the cultural works that appeal to them, in their own way,
radically different from the past. Industry professionals are at a loss,
even if they are forced to admit that we have changed times. This is the
case of Edgar Bronfman, the boss of Warner Music, who recently declared:
\"We believed that our business would remain blissfully safe, while the
world (\...) of online sharing exploded (\...). We inadvertently went to
war against consumers (\...). The result, of course, is that consumers
won.\" » THE LITTLE GENIUSES OF HACKING Pirates will not win. The law
must prevail, Nicolas Sarkozy retorts. Hence a seemingly simple system
but difficult to implement in practice. To send a warning email to an
offender and then punish him, he must be identified for sure. Nothing is
more difficult. Many of the software programs used today by pirates are
free or \"open source\" software. They are developed by communities of
Internet users, not by a single individual. Their encryption, often
sophisticated, makes it difficult to identify the offenders without
searching their hard drive. Is this desirable? And feasible? To catch an
offender, it is also necessary to install filtering tools on the Web,
which Mr. Olivennes acknowledges are not all reliable. This is why the
signatories of the agreement have given themselves twenty-four months to
decide on the appropriate technical solutions. A century on the scale of
the Internet, where the \"arms race\", police on one side, little piracy
geniuses on the other, often turns to the advantage of the latter.
Technically hypothetical, socially risky, the Olivennes mission does not
explore alternative avenues. However, they exist. They are based on the
observation that if many Internet users refuse to pay 1 cent to listen
to a piece of music or watch a film, it is better to let them download
them for free. This is what an American start-up, SpiralFrog, has
recently proposed, which pays artists and rights holders a percentage of
the advertising generated by the influx of downloaders. Other sites have
preceded it in this direction or are preparing to do so. While it is a
little early to judge their success or failure, they \"stick\" more
closely to the reality of the Internet. Like Google, YouTube or
Facebook, they have noted that free access is a primary requirement of
Internet users. And that only advertising is likely to ensure their
profitability, whether we are indignant or resigned to it.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1334

Concert tonight for the closing of Cimatics at the Mediaruimte Info.:
www.mediaruimte.be http://cimatics.com www.lab-au.com/dexia Festival
Jonctions until December 2 Info.: http://data.constantvzw.org
www.imal.org Brussels, a miniature Berlin? The inhabitants of the
Belgian capital, a French-speaking enclave in the Flemish community, do
not hesitate to draw a parallel with German bohemia: the cultural
offering is plentiful, artistic microstructures abound, cutting-edge
festivals follow one another. After Radiophonic, devoted to
\"post-radio\" creation last month, the sixth edition of Cimatics was
held this weekend, devoted to audiovisual performances, and, until
December 2, the tenth Jonctions/Verbindingen, which examines new
technologies from a political angle. \"Many artists and researchers come
to settle here, it\'s in the middle of everything, real estate in the
city centre is not yet too expensive and the cultural scene is very
active,\" notes Yves Bernard, head of iMAL, the Centre for Digital
Cultures and Technologies, which has just opened its new premises, 600
m2 located in a former warehouse in the heart of Brussels, which it
shares with two other laboratories dedicated to digital cultures, Okno
and Foam. \"Wagons\". The same observation at LAb\[au\], which opened
its Mediaruimte in 2003, an experimental venue located on rue de Laeken,
where the three members work on their creations at the border of design,
urban planning, architecture and digital art, while hosting conferences,
exhibitions, electronic music concerts, such as tonight\'s audiovisual
performances by Blevin Blectum and Synchronator. \"Brussels is teeming
with very specialised initiatives. \"Lots of small wagons, but no big
locomotives,\" notes Manuel Abendroth of LAb\[au\]. If Berlin has its
television tower, Brussels now also has its lighthouse, visible from all
around. What, during the day, looks like a vulgar office building, built
on the defunct Martini tower, a utopia of multifunctional architecture,
is transformed at nightfall. The 4,200 windows of the Dexia tower - the
second tallest in the city at 145 meters - light up like pixels. Each
window of this building, owned by a bank, is equipped with a set of
light-emitting diodes, emitting colored light and transforming the
facades into giant screens and an exhibition space. The device is
invested by LAb\[au\] who are working on permanent artistic lighting of
the tower with their long-term project, Who\'s Afraid of Red Green and
Blue, a cycle of six light variations declined over the year. The first
transformed the tower into a graphic clock, visualizing the passage of
time, the second, currently in place, allows you to know what the
weather will be like the next day, the choice of colors being dictated
by the weather forecast. \"It\'s a step towards the Cybernetic Light
Tower as Nicolas Schöffer dreamed of it,\" says Manuel Abendroth. The
collective regularly invites artists to work on the tower. Last weekend,
the glass facades sparkled to the rhythm of the light animations of
Limitazero, Holger Lippmann and Olaf Bender, created for the last Nuit
Blanche in Brussels and reprised for the Cimatics festival, which held
its sixth edition at the Beursschouwburg. Listening comfort. Originally
dedicated to VJing (the visual counterpart of DJing), Cimatics emerges
in the context of the club culture that is still very much alive in
Belgium. The festival has gone beyond the simple mix of images intended
to exhilarate the dance floor. Now, he focuses on audiovisual
performances, spaces of dialogue between sound and image, and privileges
the listening comfort of the audience, screwed into the theater seats.
\"Today, the audiovisual is ubiquitous, our environment, covered with
screens, explains Bram Crevits, one of the organizers. We wanted to give
artists the opportunity to develop their own audiovisual language, to
act as an experimental platform without giving up the party, which is
why we present works in the context of both the club and a theater.\"
The hypnotized spectators often forget to dance, immersed in this
abstract and synesthetic visual music. The haunting Static Room, a
sensory experience proposed by Scott Arford, where it is the video
signal that generates the sound, acts physically on the spectator who it
makes vibrate with its frequencies and flashing colors. The performance
of the star of the evening, Ryoichi Kurokawa, an effective composition
playing on the synchronization of sounds and visual compositions,
garnered warm applause. Entities. While we were getting dizzy with
images at Cimatics, a few steps away, at the Bellone, Manu Luksch was
screening his science fiction film Faceless, produced exclusively with
images captured by video surveillance cameras. The artist was invited by
Jonctions, which this year is looking at \"footprints in electr(on)ic
fields\". Organized by the association Constant, which works at the
intersections of feminism, digital technology, copyleft and free
software, Jonctions is concerned with these profiles and private
information that we leave on social networks. Disembodied entities that
also express themselves metaphorically in the ghostly sound
installations haunting the courtyard of the Bellone, topped with a glass
roof. These \"E-traces\" are the subject of an online game whose
development is a pretext for public conferences and workshops. With
Yoogle!, Michel Cleempoel and Nicolas Malevé analyze the economic
mechanisms at work behind the attractive interfaces of Web 2.0. \"The
problem is that Web 2.0 is a reservoir of dormant data that can be
activated. It is the collaboration of people in their own control\",
believe the artists who note that we are moving \"towards absolute
transparency of users, while the opacity of companies continues to
grow\". Constant is part of a dense and varied network of artistic
laboratories (Nadine, Recyclart, Foam.) specifically Flemish, which
allow experimentation, research, and the preparation of prototypes,
without any production imperative. Dive. On the French-speaking side,
the digital scene is limited to Transcultures, the CECN in Mons and
iMAL. Yves Bernard is pleased that digital art has finally been taken
into account since 2006 with the creation of a dedicated commission,
even if the financial aid remains much lower than that granted by the
Flemish. In the premises, we meet Yacine Sebti, one of the artists
supported by the structure, whose interactive installation, Salt Lake, a
dive into media hell, has just been presented at Almost Cinema, at the
Vooruit in Ghent. A place of work, exhibition and meetings, iMAL wants
to mix the different artistic, scientific and technical circles and is
preparing to host, on December 18, the first Brussels session of
Dorkbot, a gathering of \"people who do weird things with electricity\".

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1335

The tremendous success of Facebook (the seventh most visited site on the
Web, according to the audience analysis site alexa.com) and the recent
entry of Microsoft into its capital, valuing the company at 15 billion
dollars (around 10 billion euros), can be perplexing. The online photo
album (Facebook, in English) is indeed far from being a new idea. In
France, in particular, copainsdavant.com - published by Benchmark
Group - has existed for several years without ever having generated
enthusiasm comparable to that experienced by the American social
network, founded in 2004 by Mark Zuckerberg. The gap between the two
sites is based on two radically different conceptions of the Internet
and its uses. Copainsdavant is a technically locked site, most of whose
services are paid access. Facebook is a free system, widely open to
external contributions, whose model is deeply influenced by the open
source movement (free software), which saw the creation of Linux in the
1990s, then the development of other free software (Mozilla Firefox,
Thunderbird, OpenOffice, etc.). JOINT WORK This mode of program
development is based on the publicity of the source code (its free
access) and on the collaborative nature of the production methods:
several companies or individual programmers work on the development of a
common work, free and copyable at will. Microsoft, on the contrary,
based its success, at a time when the Internet was still in its infancy,
on precisely the opposite principles: secrecy of the source code,
minimal collaboration, paid model. This \"culture\" specific to Bill
Gates\' firm, very far from the key principles of what is commonly
called Web 2.0, perhaps explains its difficulty in breaking through on
the Internet and, in any case, in beating Google, the pioneer of Web
2.0. Facebook\'s originality is precisely to make the inexhaustible
creativity of developers outside the company contribute to the success
of its economic model. The latter can offer Internet users with a
profile on the site applications that allow them to interact with their
circle of contacts. These applications can be tools for comparing their
musical, cinematographic or literary tastes; they allow you to play
chess with your entourage, to send messages, photos, videos or virtual
gifts, to give tourist advice by pinning the places you have visited on
a world map, etc. Often fun, these small applications are also generally
a way of collecting personal information from Internet users, which will
then be valued by the sale of advertising space, admittedly restricted
and delimited, in which these external and auxiliary companies can
broadcast ads. By opening itself up in this way, in the spring, to
third-party programmers, Facebook was able to maintain and strengthen
the attractiveness of its system among Internet users. On the side of
application developers, small companies or ordinary individuals, the
craze is considerable. In about six months, more than 8,000 different
applications have been added to the Palo Alto (California) company\'s
website. This way of opening up its \"code\" to third parties also
reinforces an economic model based on advertising. Indeed, any developer
can earn money directly by placing advertisements on the home page of
their application. Many people aspire to find the killer app that will
make their fortune. This will of course be proportional to the interest
that the service provides arouses among Facebook members. And this
interest will further increase the site\'s audience, and therefore
Facebook\'s advertising revenue. With its AdSense system, Google has
done nothing else, by making any web page a potential advertising
medium, whose author is then paid according to the traffic on his site.
Google is sometimes portrayed as the big loser in Facebook\'s success,
but nothing could be less certain. Many developers of applications
integrated with Facebook actually use advertising banners placed\... by
Google on their dedicated space, within Facebook. Facebook\'s success
therefore also benefits Google. The trend illustrated by the success of
the Palo Alto firm is tangible in more traditional activities, such as
online sales. For example, the e-tailer Amazon now offers on its own
platform products put on sale by third-party companies or individuals,
thus becoming as much a marketplace as a retailer. The idea is no longer
just to destroy the competition but, when possible, to integrate it and
thus make it compete for the audience of its brand.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1336

The good times are back in Silicon Valley, and so are the excesses of
the dot-com boom of the 1990s. But when this nascent boom fades---as
cycles tend to do---it is unlikely to follow the devastating path of the
last tech bust. The initial tech boom began in 1995 when Netscape
Communications, a pioneer in Internet browsing, went public. A gold rush
ensued: investors poured billions of dollars into fledgling Internet
companies, funding ventures in areas such as e-commerce and optical
networking. Between 1995 and 2000, more than 1,100 technology companies
went public. Then the good times ended. Trendy Internet companies, such
as online grocer Webvan Group and pet-goods retailer Pets.com, hungry
for publicity but short on profits, failed. Many investors lost their
last shirts as the tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite Index plunged. Silicon
Valley lost 185,000 jobs, or one in five, between 2001 and 2005. The
economic damage was severe in part because the companies that had fueled
the boom gobbled up all the money and grew rapidly. At that time,
Internet companies had to invest millions in computer servers and
services such as Internet connectivity to get their businesses up and
running. They hired hundreds of employees and rented large offices. They
needed millions of dollars from venture capitalists, who back young
companies (venture capitalists hope to make a profit when their
companies go public or are acquired by larger corporations). Frenzy In
2000, at the height of the dot-com frenzy, venture capitalists poured
nearly \$95 billion into young companies. This time around, the growth
potential is more modest. Investments in young companies \-- especially
those specializing in social networking and online video \-- have
increased sharply in the past two years, as have the amounts venture
capitalists must pay for stakes in them. But overall, they are on track
to pour less than \$30 billion this year, VentureOne Corp. says.
(VentureOne is owned by Dow Jones & Co., publisher of the Wall Street
Journal.) Given the proliferation of cheap technologies such as
open-source software and the ability to find cheap labor overseas,
today\'s Internet startups generally need less money to run their
businesses. In any case, this dearth of initial public offerings may
contain the seeds of a future downturn. And because few private-equity
companies are going public, many startups are relying more on mergers
and acquisitions for cash. A handful of large potential buyers, such as
Google, Yahoo! and Microsoft, are responsible for most acquisitions of
Internet companies. But not all new dot-coms can be acquired by Google,
Yahoo! and Microsoft. \"There are tons of companies, but only a
half-dozen buyers,\" says Peter Falvey, co-founder of the investment
bank Revolution Partners. \"If you\'re counting on Google to buy your
company, and Google decides to expand internally instead, you\'re out of
luck.\" A slowdown in the online advertising market could also help fuel
a tech industry meltdown. Many of today\'s Internet startups generate
revenue solely from selling online advertising, says David Liu, a
technology investment banker at Jefferies Broadview in California. \* \*
\* Few Buyers A handful of large potential buyers, such as Google,
Yahoo! and Microsoft, account for most acquisitions of Internet
companies. But not all new dot-coms can be acquired by Google, Yahoo!
and Microsoft. \"There are tons of companies, but only a half-dozen
buyers,\" says Peter Falvey, co-founder of the investment bank
Revolution Partners. \"If you\'re counting on Google to buy your
company, and Google decides to expand in-house instead, you\'re out of
luck.\" A slowdown in the online advertising market could also help fuel
a tech industry meltdown. Many of today\'s Internet startups generate
revenue solely from selling online advertising, says David Liu, a
technology investment banker at Jefferies Broadview in California.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1337

Two years ago, at the World Summit on the Information Society in Tunis,
Professor Nicholas Negroponte surprised the participants of the
conference organized by the United Nations with a new project of his
own. His new mission: to create a laptop for less than a hundred dollars
and offer it free of charge to school-age children in developing
countries. A simple, catchy concept, but one that quickly became more
complex. Two years later, almost to the day, the team of the non-profit
organization One Laptop Per Child succeeded in its challenge, and the
computers are now heading to children. But to get there, Negroponte\'s
team had to revise its strategy. The original concept called for the
governments of the populations concerned to be proactive in the process,
as did the governments of wealthier countries. But their collaboration
has not always lived up to expectations. As a result, the organization
One Laptop Per Child has decided to call on citizens to multiply the
number of laptops that can be sent to children. But, unlike other
organizations, other campaigns, this one does not ask you for a donation
in exchange for a card from the child you will help, the OLPC offers you
the same computer that the child will receive in his country in the hope
that a child in your circle will benefit from it. But to participate in
this vast educational project, because we are not talking about a
computer connection campaign here, but rather an education program, you
only have eight days left to join the \"Give one, get one!\" operation.
Until November 26, for all Americans and Canadians who purchase the XO
laptop at a cost of 399 US dollars, or CAD 388, an XO will be sent to a
child in Afghanistan, Cambodia, Haiti or Rwanda. In return, in addition
to an XO, you will also receive a tax-deductible receipt for \$199 for
the donation of a computer sent to a child in a developing country. The
XO computer, which runs on the Linux operating system, offers a host of
public domain software programmed using open-source code. This allows
children and teachers to modify the software according to their needs.
The computer comes with its share of software, including those for
getting the most out of the Internet, but others for working, learning
and playing locally. The XO is used to write and publish texts, to
videoconference, to play music, to read e-books or to play online games.
Created first and foremost for use in disadvantaged environments, the
computer is obviously very robust, and its keyboard is protected by a
rubber specially designed to withstand harsh climatic conditions. Better
still, it is impervious to water, dust and dirt. The keyboard size is
also specially designed to be easier to use by children\'s small hands.
The basic idea being to allow learning and sharing, the XO computer is
equipped with everything necessary to connect to a wireless network in a
simple way. And the \"ears\" of the computer, which allow the WiFi
connection, are of better quality than those of most traditional
laptops. The child can thus connect to the Internet to share information
or simply chat with other children. The computer can also be used to
take photos, make videos or record voice. The device is also equipped
with an integrated SD card reader. Question of autonomy, once again,
according to its purpose, the device is exemplary in terms of energy
efficiency. The XO uses a battery that can operate up to 2000 recharge
cycles. This is four times the duration of a commercial laptop battery.
Away from electricity, the device can be recharged manually by hand
crank or using a solar panel. As for a traditional power supply, the XO
is equipped with a power outlet that accepts a 110 to 240 volt power
source. Be careful, the One Laptop per Child Foundation does not have a
service facility or help desk for technical support. In the event of a
glitch, technical problem or difficulty understanding the computer, we
will therefore have to rely on other users, friends, family or bloggers
to come to our rescue. However, the OLPC says it wants to set up a paid
technical support service that will be available to those who want it. I
conclude by quoting Kofi Annan who, when he was still Secretary-General
of the United Nations, had said of this project: \"It is not a question
of simply giving a laptop to a child as if we were bewitching him with a
magic spell. The magic is in everyone - every child, every scientist,
every student, every citizen who does it. This project was designed to
move forward, toward the light of day.\" For more information on the One
Laptop per Child Foundation program, or to order an XO device, visit
www.laptopgiving.org/fr. bguglielminetti@ledevoir.com Bruno
Guglielminetti is a producer and new technology columnist for
Radio-Canada\'s Première Chaîne. He is also the editor of Carnet techno
(www.radio-canada.ca/techno).

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1338

GOOGLE AFTER conquering PCs around the world, Google is taking on mobile
phones. In about two weeks, the Internet star should declare its
candidacy to win a mobile frequency during the auctions that will take
place in January in the United States. Google is methodically advancing
in the mobile phone universe. Already on November 6, the Mountain View
firm had unveiled Android, the mobile operating system that brings
together 33 partners (operators, terminal manufacturers, IT groups,
etc.). The first devices to be equipped with Android should see the
light of day in the spring. Google relies on free software and counts on
the creativity of developers to invent new applications. But the
Californian firm is not content to compete with Windows Mobile and
Symbian, the operating systems of Microsoft and Nokia. It is also
preparing to become a mobile operator. Indeed, according to the Wall
Street Journal, the search engine should participate alone in the
auctions organized in January by the Federal Communications Commission
(FCC) and is preparing its financing plan. The amount of the license
could exceed 4.6 billion dollars. Tests in Mountain View Google
executives quoted by the WSJ justify this offensive: \"Our goal is to
ensure that American consumers have more choice in a competitive and
open mobile world.\" The firm is especially eyeing the 95 billion
dollars raked in last year in the United States by mobile phone
operators. Google hopes to offer new offers without subscription or
financed by advertising. The company is testing a mobile network in
Mountain View where terminals equipped with Android are already working.
Another experiment is also being conducted by Google in Great Britain
with Ubiquisys, a company that uses \"femtocell\" technology that uses
the Internet connections of individuals in areas poorly covered by
mobile infrastructure. Google has chosen to venture where neither Apple
nor Microsoft have yet ventured.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1339

New York - Google wants to create the \"engine\" that does everything
for mobile phones, relying on thousands of volunteer computer
scientists: users can expect a multitude of new functions, but also
customized advertising that will enrich the internet giant. Google
announced this week an alliance with 33 players in the mobile phone
industry (operators, manufacturers, IT groups, etc.) to create
\"Android\": a system at the heart of new phone models, and that any
programmer will be able to enrich with new functions. Phones equipped
with Android will arrive in mid-2008. If it succeeds in its bet, Google
will win the jackpot: control over the \"third screen\", still in its
infancy, but promised to have the same explosion as the TV and the
computer. \"Google is applying to the mobile space the same recipe that
Microsoft did with the PC 25 years ago,\" commented Carmi Levy, vice
president of AR Communications. \"Before Microsoft\'s Windows system,
the world of personal computers was fragmented between competing
platforms. Microsoft launched its platform and changed everything,
creating an ecosystem that attracted all the players big and small,\" he
said. \"If Google succeeds, the current landscape where phones are
locked into carriers, which control their functions, will change:
carriers will have less control and users more,\" he added. Google\'s
system will compete with the current leaders: Symbian, the system that
runs three-quarters of the world\'s phones - Nokia and its rivals:
Apple\'s iPhone, Palm, BlackBerry (RIM group) - and Microsoft\'s Windows
Mobile. But the firm Strategy Analytics does not predict a Google tidal
wave: Android could equip two percent of phones by the end of 2008.
Everything will depend, in fact, on the innovations that Android brings.
To do this, Google is counting on the vast community of free software,
and will publish, in a few days, the framework of Android, so that
programmers can enrich it with programs of their own. This is the
innovation model of free software: tens of thousands of programmers in
the world, especially in France and the United States, voluntarily
create programs, which each can in turn improve - out of taste, a desire
to make themselves known or for academic research. It is this community,
which is gradually gaining ground in the face of paid software, which
makes the success of the social networking site Facebook, with 5,000
programs, fun or serious, adopted by millions of enthusiasts.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1340

NEW YORK - Internet giant Google announced yesterday that it is working
with 33 allies - manufacturers, operators and developers - to develop an
\"open\" and free system for mobile phones, and promised to release
cheap phones running on this system in the second half of 2008. This
platform, called Android, will include an operating system (the
\"engine\" of the phone), an interface and programs, the group
specified. It will be \"open\" to outside developers, based on the model
of free software such as Linux. Among the members of this vast alliance
are manufacturers Motorola, Samsung and HTC, as well as American
operators T-Mobile (a subsidiary of German Deutsche Telekom) and Sprint
Nextel, Japan\'s NTT DoCoMo, China\'s China Mobile, and, in Europe,
Telecom Italia and Telefonica, but also eBay, Intel and Qualcomm. Such a
system would allow Google to have devices specially adapted to all its
Internet functions, such as search, email, Gmail, maps, YouTube and
instant messaging, and thus increase its revenues in mobile phone
advertising, a niche that should explode in five years. On the NASDAQ,
Google shares rose more than 2% on the news, to \$725.65. Rumors have
been circulating for months about the upcoming release of a GPhone (for
Google Phone), with some specialized sites even publishing photos of
prototypes that Google is said to have developed with Asian
manufacturers. Yesterday\'s announcement does not go that far, but
places Google at the heart of a new type of phone. External developers
will be able to enrich Android with new applications, notably based on
the possibilities opened up by GPS location: social sites based on the
location where one is, search for local businesses and, of course,
geographically targeted advertising. It would compete with the currently
dominant systems, such as Symbian, a group owned by several global
manufacturers including Nokia, Ericsson, Sony and Panasonic, and which
equips a good part of their phones, or Symbian\'s challenger, Windows
Mobile. Google CEO Eric Schmidt had already suggested last May that the
group would \"probably build a creative platform\" for mobile phones and
\"convince third parties to do it because that\'s where the innovation
will come from\". He added that \"the new models of phones will be
person-to-person\", with exchanges of videos or other data between
users. Google is very interested in mobile telephony: it indicated that
it would participate in the auction of frequencies that the government
will organize in January in the United States, which could allow it to
set up its own mobile telephone network and become an operator. The
launch by Google of a new system for mobiles will change the game
especially in the United States, where operators control the
distribution of mobile phones and their applications.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1341

New York - Internet giant Google, along with 33 allies - manufacturers,
operators and developers - will launch a free \"open\" system for mobile
phones, a long-awaited initiative that could give a boost to the mobile
Internet worldwide. Google promised yesterday that it would release
cheap phones running the system, called \"Android\", in the second half
of 2008, which will be \"open\" to outside developers, based on the
model of free software such as Linux. It will include an operating
system (the \"engine\" of the phone), an interface and programs, the
group said. Its allies include manufacturers Motorola, Samsung and HTC,
as well as American operators T-Mobile (Deutsche Telekom) and Sprint
Nextel, Japan\'s NTT DoCoMo, China\'s China Mobile, and in Europe
Telecom Italia and Telefonica, but also eBay, Intel and Qualcomm. On
these phones, Google could promote its own Internet functions, such as
search, Gmail e-mail, maps or YouTube, and increase its revenue from
mobile phone advertising. No GPhone For months, rumors had been
circulating that a \"GPhone\" (for Google Phone) would soon be released.
In the end, Google preferred to bet on a system that could be installed
on many models. \"We are not announcing a Gphone,\" said Google CEO Eric
Schmidt during a conference yesterday, \"but something much more
ambitious: we hope that Android will be the engine of thousands of new
phones, with new applications that we cannot even imagine today.\" By
betting on external developers, Google is choosing a strategy similar to
that announced last week on social networking sites, where, in alliance
with about twenty large sites, it launched an open platform, where
programmers can create applications for all participants. \"The best
model is openness,\" said Eric Schmidt yesterday. For mobile, where the
range of possibilities remains largely unexplored, Google\'s platform
could spawn a wealth of new features. Open platforms are \"a huge
motivator for us,\" said Max Levchin, CEO of Slide, which created many
applications for social networking sites Facebook and MySpace and is
eager to bring them to mobile phones. While users can hope for new
features, Google can hope for new revenue. Some analysts predict a
jackpot: Sandeep Aggarwal of Oppenheimer said Google could earn \$2
billion to \$4.8 billion a year in additional revenue - mostly from
advertising - in the second and third years after the phones launch, and
as much as \$10 billion a year after four or five years. He estimated
that Google would earn \$2 to \$4 per Android phone, compared with about
\$19 per PC currently. More nuanced, Charles Golvin, of Forrester,
underlines that \"the impact will be broad among all mobile players,
pushing innovative developers to create functions\" but that \"these
phones will initially represent only a very small share of the market\".
In any case, all analysts expect a boom in mobile advertising revenues,
which should increase tenfold by 2011 to reach 14 billion US dollars.
Not to mention that the world already has three billion mobile phones,
of which 35% to 40% already have Internet access, a percentage that is
rising. Google could even become a mobile operator: it plans to
participate in the auction of frequencies that the government will
organize in January in the United States, which could allow it to set up
its own mobile telephone network.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1342

New York - The American group Wal-Mart put on sale yesterday a desktop
computer for \$199, which does not run Windows but an operating system
from the free software Linux, intended to integrate Google\'s free
software, reports the specialized press. This computer, manufactured by
the Everex group and called gPC, includes a 1.5 GHz processor, 512 MB of
RAM and an 80 GB hard drive.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1343

NEW YORK - Google is expected to unveil a mobile phone operating system
in two weeks that will bring together all of its Internet functions,
such as search, email, Gmail, maps, YouTube and instant messaging, the
Wall Street Journal reported yesterday. Google wants the first phones
equipped with its system to be released around June 2008, the newspaper
said, and is currently negotiating with manufacturers. Rumors have been
circulating for months about the upcoming release of a \"GPhone\" (for
Google Phone), with some specialized sites even publishing photos of
prototypes that Google is said to have developed with Asian
manufacturers. This new operating system is intended to be an engine for
any model of mobile phone, the newspaper explained. It could be free,
based on the free software LinuXOS, and open to developers who could
enrich it with new applications, notably based on the possibilities
opened up by GPS location: social sites based on the location where one
is, search for local businesses and, of course, geographically targeted
advertising. It would compete with the currently dominant systems, such
as that of Symbian, a group owned by several global manufacturers
including Nokia, Ericsson, Sony and Panasonic, and which equips a good
part of their phones, or even Symbian\'s challenger, Windows Mobile.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1344

GOOGLE THE AMERICAN GIANT Google should unveil within two weeks a mobile
phone operating system that combines all its Internet functions: web
search, Gmail e-mails, maps, YouTube and instant messaging, according to
the Wall Street Journal. The goal is to release the first phones
equipped with this system in mid-2008. Google is in the midst of
negotiations with manufacturers. For months, rumors have been
circulating about the upcoming release of a \"GPhone\" (for Google
Phone), with some specialized sites even publishing photos of prototypes
that Google is said to have developed with Asian manufacturers. This new
operating system is intended to be an engine for any model of mobile
phone. It could be free, based on the free software LinuX OS, and open
to developers who could enhance it. Google is said to have already
established contacts with several operators with a view to adopting it.
However, France Télécom, whose name was mentioned, categorically denied
yesterday any discussions with Google on the design of new mobile
terminals.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1345

Internet The Xiti Monitor institute, which analyses Internet users\'
connection data, has just published its new \"browser barometer\",
carried out over the month of September. While Internet Explorer
continues to reign supreme in this area, the free Firefox browser is
consolidating its position as a challenger. In September, in Europe,
Firefox was used by 27.7% of Internet users. An increase of more than
six points compared to September 2006. An impressive figure, given the
sclerotic situation of the browser market just a few years ago. At the
end of 2004, when the first version of Firefox was released, Internet
Explorer was in a quasi-monopoly situation. Press (1) Representatives of
the staff of Les Echos met on Friday with Marc Ladreit de Lacharrière,
CEO of the Fimalac group. The latter declared himself a candidate in
July to take over the daily newspaper, while Pearson, the owner, is in
exclusive negotiations with LVMH until November 26. Friday\'s meeting
was aimed at \"getting him to clarify the strategic, social and
editorial aspects of his acquisition project.\" LVMH, for its part, has
not yet responded to the elected officials\' request for a meeting.
Press (2) European Press Freedom Day, called by the European Federation
of Journalists, will take place on Monday, November 5 (and not October
29, as mistakenly announced yesterday). A rally will take place at 1:30
p.m. in front of the National Assembly, and journalists\' unions will
submit their proposals to the deputies with the petition launched on
October 4 (www.intersj.info). Press (3) The \"New York Times,\" which
recently decided to switch to the \"all free\" model for its site, has
also chosen to fully adopt open source and free software. Better still:
employees of the New York Times have decided to participate fully in the
movement, by releasing their own Web applications.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1346

A month after Microsoft was convicted of \"abuse of a dominant
position\" by Brussels, François Lévêque (read below) takes stock of
competitive practices in the high-tech sector. After its historic defeat
before the Luxembourg court and the European Commission, will Microsoft
get back on track? It\'s likely, this decision has already had an
effect. Microsoft has agreed to give access to information that, until
now, it did not want to communicate to software developers. This will
allow the latter to develop \"interoperable\" products, therefore
compatible with Windows, more easily and at a lower cost. The price for
access to this information is reduced to a single amount of 10,000 euros
for developers of free software! Will this decision really change the
practices of multinationals? It will become difficult in Europe for
firms that hold very high market shares in a sector to rely on their
monopoly to extend it to a new market. Of course, in the case of
Microsoft and the audio and video software MediaPlayer, there is no
going back: these remedies will not correct the abuses of the past but,
at best, prevent those of the future. But Microsoft and other
super-dominant companies now know that they are under the surveillance
of the competition authorities. They have also gotten into the habit of
going to see them before launching a new product. This was the case for
Vista, Microsoft\'s new operating system. Some say that to challenge
monopolies these procedures are much less useful than innovation, as
with Firefox, which did not wait for the support of the law to cut
Microsoft\'s legs. Fortunately for consumers, innovation moves faster
than the application of competition policy. Economists are right to
think that a monopoly always ends up being eroded. It attracts
competition lured by high prices and profits and, beyond a certain time,
say ten years, competitors end up entering. In some cases, competition
law can buy time. If the regulator intervenes after eight years,
consumers gain two years. Should high-tech companies be able to predict
monopoly rents to continue to innovate? We are in a sector where
innovations are amplified by network effects: the more widespread a
product is, the more consumers have an interest in adopting it for their
ease of use. In high-tech, competition does not aim to acquire a market
share, but to control almost all of it. This is the real driver of
innovation. A company will dominate for a period, like Microsoft in the
PC era or Apple in the early days of digital music, and then there will
be another innovation and they will gradually lose their influence. The
succession of monopolies is a fairly characteristic feature of
high-tech. The Brussels sanction against the Microsoft company
highlights the differences in conceptions in the United States and
Europe. There is a cliché, completely false, which consists in saying
that Europe protects competitors while the United States defends the
interests of consumers. This was true, but in the last century! Where
the Americans do not have the same vision is that they consider that the
market will end up eroding ill-gotten monopolies more effectively than
the regulator. Confidence in the virtues of the market is much stronger
there. Let us not forget that competition law sometimes makes mistakes
by condemning companies that have not abused their dominant position.
The Americans are very afraid of this type of error because it costs
much more to innovation than letting the guilty go! Should we then
expect an inflation of procedures on the Old Continent? This decision
will give the European Commission the energy to combat abuses of
dominant position. Because of the differences perceived on both sides of
the Atlantic, more and more American abuses will find themselves dealt
with in Europe, on a remote battlefield. By perpetuating the cliché of a
Europe that listens more to competitors, the latter tell themselves that
their interests will be better defended here. This trend will become
more acute and will not be without posing political problems if the
Commission condemns other American locomotives such as Qualcomm (chips
for mobile phones), Intel (microprocessors), etc. There is now a
geopolitical issue in competition law.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1347

Brussels - The American software giant Microsoft yesterday dropped its
last two appeals to the European Court of Justice against decisions of
the European Commission, a new sign that it now seems determined to keep
a low profile in Brussels. This announcement comes two days after the
group finally decided to comply with a series of demands made three and
a half years ago by Brussels, which had condemned it for abuse of
dominant position to a hefty fine of 497 million euros (680 million
\$CAN). This condemnation was confirmed on September 17 by the European
Court of Justice. The American group finally agreed to provide all its
competitors, including publishers of free software, and at significantly
reduced prices, the technical data necessary for them to design products
compatible with its Windows operating system. The first abandoned appeal
concerned daily fines imposed in July 2006 by the Commission for failure
to communicate technical data to Microsoft\'s competitors in October
2006. The second appeal sought the annulment of the obligation to also
communicate this data to manufacturers of free software.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1348

MICROSOFT \"This is a victory day for consumers\... not for the
Commission,\" said Competition Commissioner Neelie Kroes yesterday,
after announcing that Microsoft had reached an agreement that would
allow its competitors to obtain the information needed to facilitate
dialogue between PCs and servers running on operating systems other than
Windows. And thus simplify communication between the Microsoft and open
source worlds. The standoff between the Commission and the American
software giant therefore ends with a handshake. On 17 September, the
Luxembourg Court of First Instance had already confirmed the sanctions
imposed by the European Commission, but Microsoft still had the
possibility of appealing. Yesterday, Microsoft specified that it would
stick to this epilogue and \"will continue to work closely with the
Commission and industry to create a thriving and competitive environment
for information technology in Europe and worldwide.\" The agreement
provides that Microsoft will charge publishers a one-off fee of 10,000
euros to obtain technical information that will help them make their
software compatible with the Windows operating system. In addition, the
rights for the use of patents worldwide will become more affordable:
they will reach 0.4% of total sales compared to 5.95% previously. A
final point in the chapter \"I hope this dark chapter is over,\"
stressed Neelie Kroes, who expects Microsoft\'s market share to fall
from 95% to 50% in the near future. \"I have always said that free
software developers should be able to benefit from interoperability. Now
they can.\" The inflexible commissioner warned that she would be
\"vigilant\", particularly with regard to Windows Vista, the latest
operating system from the Redmond giant. \"Microsoft should write that
into its head,\" she exclaimed. In total, the European affair will have
cost Bill Gates\' group nearly 800 million euros in fines and penalty
payments.

449. ## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1349

450. ## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1350

Brussels - Three and a half years after fining Microsoft for abuse of a
dominant position, Brussels finally got the American software giant to
share better technical information about its flagship Windows operating
system with its competitors yesterday. This \"interoperability\"
requirement was formulated in March 2004, when the Commission fined
Microsoft €497 million. The conviction was essentially confirmed last
month by the European Court of Justice. After \"final contacts very
early this morning\", \"Microsoft has finally agreed to respect its
obligations\", announced the European Commissioner for Competition,
Neelie Kroes, at a press conference. Microsoft has indicated for its
part that it is not appealing the judgment handed down on 17 September
by the European Court, which seems to put an end to the case. In
concrete terms, the American group will allow free software publishers
to access the data needed to develop products compatible with Windows,
which equips more than 90% of microcomputers in the world. It had
opposed this until now. Microsoft has also agreed to reduce the
compensation demanded from each publisher to a single amount of 10,000
euros. The rights for the use of patents at the global level are also
falling, to 0.4% of the total amount of sales compared to 5.95% demanded
previously. Brussels considered the conditions imposed until now to be
\"totally unreasonable\". \"This is a day of victory for consumers\",
Neelie Kroes rejoiced, however judging it \"regrettable\" that Microsoft
gave in \"only after a considerable delay\". Faced with the American
group\'s lack of cooperation, the Commission imposed initial penalty
payments on it in the summer of 2006. And its long standoff with
Microsoft was punctuated by various legal actions and regular threats of
additional penalty payments. \"We no longer have any reason to impose
further daily penalty payments on Microsoft from today,\" Neelie Kroes
said on Monday. She promised a decision \"as soon as possible\" on the
amount the group would have to pay, without saying whether negotiations
with Microsoft were possible on this. In July 2006, the group was
already exposed to 280 million euros in penalty payments. However, she
warned it that it would be exposed to new fines in the event of a new
infringement. A way of leaving the door open to investigations into
other products of the group, such as the new version of Windows released
since 2007 and renamed Vista. Other cases This victory over Microsoft
could push the Commission to be more aggressive against abuses of
dominant positions. \"The store is still open,\" commented Neelie Kroes,
mentioning \"a few other cases\" under study. At the beginning of
October, it launched an in-depth investigation into the American
manufacturer of chips for mobile telephony Qualcomm, accused by several
equipment manufacturers of demanding disproportionate royalties for the
use of its patents. For several experts, the Qualcomm case could be,
after Microsoft, the new major battle for the Commission. Brussels also
has in its sights the world leader in microprocessors Intel, pinned in
July for illegal commercial practices aimed at excluding its competitors
from the market. Intel has until January 4 to present its arguments. The
Commission could also look more closely at the case of the internet star
Google. It is still examining its controversial plan to buy the online
advertising network DoubleClick.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1351

We hear a lot about free software and the alternative it represents to
desktop software, or other software, that we inevitably end up having to
buy. To get a certain number of them, however, you have to navigate from
one site to another, do some research or know very precisely what you
need. You can also go directly to the Google Pack page. This is a list
of software, all downloadable for free, that are offered by the computer
giant Google. This software obviously includes applications created by
Google, such as the toolbar for Internet Explorer, or the photo sharing
software Picasa. There are also some other useful software, such as the
StarOffice office suite, the Skype internet telephony client and the
Firefox browser, from Mozilla.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1352

This is a victory across the board for the European Commission. After
losing its case against Brussels a month ago, Microsoft decided
yesterday to fall into line. Not only has the American company \"finally
agreed to respect its obligations\" as Competition Commissioner Neelie
Kroes declared, but the world\'s number one software company is for the
first time giving up appealing a decision that is unfavorable to it. The
group, which until now opposed Europe\'s interoperability requirements -
compatibility between different computer systems - will now allow
software publishers to freely access, for a single standard price of
10,000 euros, the data needed to develop products compatible with its
Windows software. This victory over Microsoft could push the European
Commission to be more aggressive against abuses of a dominant position.
\"The store is still open,\" noted Neelie Kroes, mentioning \"a few
other cases\" under study such as Qualcomm or Intel.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1353

Cliptic on the lookout For clearing the way, we can count on sharp blogs
such as Cliptic. In the selection, the interactive clip of Arcade Fire
Neon Bible, the Lynchian one, directed by Patrick Daughters for the
Liars or the pop animations with colorful lettering by Peter Mrzyk and
Jean-François Moriceau for our diva Katerine (photo). cliptip. blogspot.
com/ Scopitone in retro For the nostalgic, a kitsch selection of
scopitones, reel-to-reel jukeboxes from the 60s, ancestor of the video
clip, with among others Dario Moreno\'s Marmite, or the ravishing Mighty
Mississippi (photo).
scopitones.blogs.com/scopitonescom/watch_scopitones/index.htmlP Concerts
to take away, live For those who want to see music differently, all
that\'s left to do is download Les concerts à emporter, sequence shots
that capture the musicians: Elvis Perkins, Beirut (photo), Comelade. in
unusual places, outside the usual context of the stage, precious moments
captured live by the agitators of the Blogothèque.
www.blogotheque.net/concertaemporter Before the advent of video sharing
sites, we would wallow on the couch in front of the MTV or M6 clip tap,
hypnotized by these formatted promotional images, spewed out at a
hellish pace, in the often vain hope of coming across an indie gem that
would have been lost in this bombardment of garish electrons. To watch
more artistic clips, it was better to go to short film festivals
(Onedotzero, Nemo, Resfest.) or pick up a DVD here and there. Then came
YouTube and the like, a goldmine for music video enthusiasts who pour
out thousands of them. Memory. The advantage and disadvantage of the
system is that you have to dig through the depths yourself to unearth
the desired clip. Last.tv provides an adequate answer for all the lazy
people, by providing a continuous flow of images that match our musical
tastes. This application is the video counterpart of the online radio
Last.fm, a custom radio that broadcasts tracks based on our musical
preferences. The more we listen to it, the more it resembles us, Last.fm
remembers what the listener likes and what he skips, gradually building
up his profile. Last.tv uses this profile to automatically search
YouTube, find videos corresponding to the musicians listened to and
broadcast them in a continuous stream. The search is done by artist
name, without any other sorting. The music channel thus generated dumps
everything that can be found in terms of images of our favorite artists
(you just have to enter the name of your account or that of your
\"friends\"): clips, live concerts, bootlegs, interviews and other fan
parodies. \"A simple concept followed by a slew of other applications
offering similar things, notes one of the managers of Last.tv, Alper
Çugun. The most interesting ones aggregate multiple video sources within
a single Flash player.\" Among them, FIQL, whose slogan is: \"You choose
the songs, we\'ll find the videos.\" The site allows you to create or
download your music playlist and obtain the matching video playlist.
More restrictive but in DVD quality, you can also download Miro, the
open source video player (www.getmiro.com), and download the clips
podcasted by the Telemusicvision channel, including Take me back to your
house by The Basement Jaxx and its high-energy choreographies of Russian
dancers. Record crisis. Another option is to use an engine like
Utrecht.cc, which specializes in searching for music videos on YouTube.
It currently indexes more than 201,000 clips and concert videos. Based
on the history of requests, it also promises to refine its
recommendations and to give you a tailor-made selection in the \"New for
you\" section, and also displays the lyrics of the song. Despite the
proliferation of distribution platforms, video clips are not really in
the spotlight, a victim of the record crisis. Investments in production
are lower and quality clips are rare. lasttv.net/ www.fiql.com/tv/
fr.utrecht.cc telemusicvision.com /

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1354

Has Wikipedia created a quality source for history, probably the
category with the largest number of articles? In an article entitled
\"Can History be opensource? Wikipedia and the future of the past (June
2006)\", historian Roy Rosenzweig takes stock
(Chnm.gmu.edu/resources/essays/d/42, translated into French on the site
aphgcaen.free.fr/).

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1355

I believe I have good skills to manage a National League hockey club,
even to improve my team through judicious trades. At least, the new
version of the NHL08 game makes me feel like a good manager and a good
coach. However, if the game works well and has several technical
improvements compared to the 2007 version, I had some disappointments
regarding the basic lineups, the transfers between the NHL team and the
farm club. Previously, in the Dynasty game mode for a current season,
you could easily go and get or return players to the minor leagues.
Currently, you have to make transfers in another section of the game
before starting your season. If there is another method, I have not
found it yet. Before, it was clear, simple, interesting and effective. I
know the game was finished and released before the latest NHL club
reorganizations, but there are some surprising errors in the player
profiles, especially regarding rookies. On the Montreal Canadiens team,
Higgins, Murray and Plekanec are on the rookie list while Carey Price,
the new darling, is not even in the Canadiens\' lineup or in the farm
team\'s lineup. And that\'s the case for several other teams. So far,
the only update on the official website concerns the players\' jerseys
and numbers. Hockey purists will have a headache. The starting
interface, a depressing blue-grey, really lacks sparkle. However, when
you start a game, the graphics look completely different. You also have
to make sure you have understood the subtleties of the new controller
controls. Personally, I couldn\'t get used to the slap shot with the
little broomstick and, like several other players I met virtually on the
forums, had to change the controls back to the basic ones in the 2007
version. Technically, there are some nice improvements, but also some
disappointments. However, in Dynasty mode, I like the owner\'s weekly
objectives and the rewards that follow. It\'s a good idea. The
characters on the ice are well detailed. The game itself is very
interesting. RATING: \*\*\* PC DVD. Minimum requirements: 1.3 GHz
processor, Windows XP, 2000 or Vista, 256 to 512 MB of RAM, 3D graphics
card at 64 MB, 4 X drive. Publisher: Electronic Arts. Suggested price:
\$50. Distributor: PMD Logisoft. REPROBATES A fantastic and distressing
world The Future Games team, which produced The Black Mirror and NiBiRu,
has just launched a brand new adventure that mixes fantasy, anxiety and
even a bit of horror. Of the point and click type, the game requires
more thinking than manipulating the controls like in sports games.
However, to solve the puzzle, it will be a sport since you have to find
objects, make assemblies, talk to the other characters to get an idea of
where you are. There are tools to make to have a way to leave this
island where people seem to have been mysteriously moved. An island or
purgatory as Izmael supposes, a somewhat enlightened character, no one
knows. The revelation comes in the last chapter. The other characters
come from different countries, but also from different eras, which adds
to the feeling of confusion of the main character Adam Raichl. The
graphics, the definition of the characters, the smallest details of the
settings are polished even if the universe in which Adam evolves is
sometimes gloomy, like at the time of the suicide of Danica, one of the
characters, or the discovery of a hanged man. The story is particularly
astonishing, but well put together. The only negative point appears when
the player must disentangle himself from small arcade games to go
further. When you settle in for this type of adventure, the mini-games
take away a lot of charm, especially that of the target to put out the
fire in the wrecked car in the second nightmare. Personally, I find it
useless in the unfolding of the story and I could have done without it.
Despite this, the game is very well done. Yves Therrien RATING: \*\*\*
PC DVD. Minimum configuration: 1.5 GHz processor, Windows XP or Vista,
512 MB of RAM, 3D graphics card, 4 X reader. Publisher: Micro
Application, Future Games. Suggested price: \$40. Distributor: DLL
Presse. INSPIRATION 8 Visual expression of ideas The Quebec company De
Marque has just launched version 8, in French, of the Inspiration
software. It is a visual tool that students, and even adults, can use to
organize their ideas for work or projects to make neat presentations.
The software is easy to use. You can master it in a few minutes. Among
the software\'s features, there is the Express Mode tool for
brainstorming, a template creation wizard, the integration of sound and
video and the option to export to a site skeleton to easily create a Web
structure. Added to this are new features such as the \"mind map\" mode,
the search for symbols by keyword in addition to thousands of new
symbols. The transfer and export options have been improved and there
are more automatic organization options. On the site http://inspira
tion.demarque.com, you can see a demonstration of the possibilities in
the guided tour section, download a trial version, or buy the version
online for both Mac and Windows. A very practical software for those
whose sense of logic is expressed more clearly with visuals. It is also
easy to use, but there is a tutorial to learn how to master the
different functions. Yves Therrien EVALUATION: \*\*\*\* Mac/PC hybrid
disk. Minimum configuration: PC processor 486 or better, Windows 95 and
higher. Mac with OS X (10.1.5). Display in thousands of colors.
Publisher: De Marque. Suggested price: \$98. ANTIDOTE RX UPDATE The
Antidote software has just been updated (www.druide.com) to take into
account computers with multiple processors, which makes it faster
depending on the number of processors in the computer. According to the
grand druid in chief, André D\'Orsennens, this is a major update, not
only because the engine of the linguistic tool takes into account
processors to gain speed, but also because the acceleration of the
analysis comes with an enrichment of the dictionaries while allowing the
integration of the tool with new software. The documentation mentions
more than 15 new software, including the recent Keynote and Numbers from
Apple, and the InDesign-Illustrator CS 3 couple on Windows and Mac.
Antidote continues its advances in the world of free software by being
the first grammar checker integrated into OpenOffice.org, NeoOffice and
Thunderbird on Mac OS X. It remains the only linguistic suite on Linux.
In the linguistic improvements, the documentation notes the addition of
400 new words and 4000 new co-occurrences. So, if you have Antidote RX,
the update is a must. If you don\'t have Antidote, you are missing the
best linguistic tool on the market, in my opinion. And it will cost you
a little over a hundred dollars. Yves Therrien Ytherrien@lesoleil.Com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1356

Challenge: to paint a man \"who pleases everyone\", according to his
wife. The villain offers his stings. The eccentric, his ability to
surprise. The author of an exploit, his story. But what to write,
without falling into boredom, about the one who creates consensus?
Bertrand Monthubert usually makes the job of the ordinary journalist
easier. Always ready to respond to the latest ministerial declaration,
to accept a quick interview for a radio station, to find a colleague to
drive the Parisien to the Matabiau station (Toulouse). And even to
quickly fry a duck breast for the portraitist who got off the train with
an empty stomach. There is his physique. Elegance of raven-black hair
whose suppleness highlights the sharp features of a fine and pale face
that gives him an aristocratic look a thousand leagues from his social
origins and the solid democratic feeling that drives him. But beyond
that, the tile. We ask colleagues, friends, activists, even our spouses,
and we come up against a problem. Nothing but compliments. A good
mathematician, a good activist, a good father, a good musician, a good
sportsman, a good comrade, a good teacher, modest with all that. and a
handsome guy to boot. There remains an unhealthy hope that the task is
beyond his strength. The task? Continue Sauvons la recherche, SLR for
short. Do you remember? Spring 2004, researchers in the street, with
many icons of Marie Curie, ironic slogans - no pipettes without money!
-, mass resignations of lab directors. and finally, a President of the
Republic (the one before) who, pitifully, disavows his Prime Minister. A
movement embodied by Alain Trautmann, whose short, precise, implacable
sentences for a government trampling on official commitments in favor of
research, break through the 8 p.m. wall. For the past two years, SLR has
been Bertrand Monthubert. This succession is logical, by the way.
\"First of all, for the symbolism,\" admits Trautmann, smiling into his
moustache. \"SLR was launched by an old CNRS biologist; that it was
taken over by a young provincial academic, that was all good.\" Above
all, Monthubert was already playing a key role in this disconcerting
movement. From the first tremors caused by the budgetary destruction of
public labs, Michel Broué, one of his scientific and political mentors,
met at the École normale supérieure (ENS) where he headed the
mathematics department, put him in contact with Trautmann. With the help
of former ENS classmates who were free software activists, Monthubert
launched the website that would become \"the nerve center of SLR\": an
ordinary computer on his desk, upstairs in his house. With a mouse,
Erwane, his wife, a teacher at the Toulouse Institute of Political
Studies, validates the latest contributions to the ongoing debate taking
place there. Without seeming to, the two accomplices in life and
activism have invented a new kind of social mobilization where the
Internet serves as the driving force for action. The affair began in
January 2004. Monthubert put online the appeal written by a group of
Parisian biologists. Through this text, the laboratory directors
committed to resigning if the government did not reverse its job cuts.
The success exceeded the wildest hopes. \"We found ourselves, a little
fascinated, clicking hour by hour to follow the rise in signatures in
real time,\" says Erwane Monthubert. Even today, the score of this
petition serves as a standard of measurement (225,000 including 75,000
scientists). As for SLR\'s 120,000 email addresses, they constitute a
formidable political weapon. If the beginnings of the SLR adventure are
the delight of activist memories, its current avatars are more
complicated. A place of improbable dialogue and common action between
bigwigs of the Academy of Sciences, young radicals and unionists divided
into chapels and corporations, SLR owed its existence and success only
to the sense of urgency that had seized the scientific community. Can it
survive, while the euphoria of the demonstrations fades? Avoid becoming
a closed field of union rivalries? Repel capture by a PS of which
Monthubert does not hide being an inactive member, disheartened by its
\"fucked-up operation\"? Rediscover initiative and the capacity for
resistance in the face of a government that is reforming the university
with a bulldozer, organizing the decline of research organizations?
\"Without Bertrand, it was dead\", sighs a history of the association.
This is where the \"consensual\" has done well, playing all his cards to
bring together a motley movement. \"Fortunately, he is less rough and
ill-mannered than me,\" laughs Trautmann. \"Plus, he likes it.\" His
personality fits the role perfectly. \"He is an unconscious seducer,\"
laughs Catherine Jeandel, oceanographer, soul of SLR Toulouse. His young
leading man\'s physique - \"And not just classy\" -, his oral ease, his
aplomb allowing him to challenge ministers and political leaders are not
altered by any arrogance. Reflecting an unfeigned modesty, witness this
still lively feeling of having broken into a supposedly inaccessible
environment when he succeeded in entering the École Normale Supérieure,
a selection of a few dozen elite mathematicians in an age group. If the
role suits him so much, it is because it is rooted in a strong family
history. A couple of Freinet teachers and secular activists, a father
who is an expert in maths teaching, a house filled with a rich social
life. It is difficult to evacuate the parental model when Catherine
Jeandel sees him as a \"black hussar of the Republic\". And, no doubt,
he continues the family fight when he discusses the research budget
after midnight. When he gets excited that a student asks him where to
find Bourbaki\'s booklets, the mathematicians\' bible. When he deploys
treasures of diplomacy to get academics, researchers or unionists used
to pulling each other\'s legs to act together. A way, perhaps, of still
seeking paternal approval. While he leads a crazy life, reconciling
research, courses and activism without giving up his private life, his
two children, his couple - \"I don\'t want to choose\" -, only maths
will extract a negative, surprising word from him. \"It\'s painful\", he
says. Not the late meetings, the little betrayals between activists, the
copies to be corrected. but his exploration of the mathematical
continent discovered by Alain Connes, \"noncommutative geometry\". The
pain comes from the confrontation \"with his ignorance. A strange
feeling of frustration in the face of the impossibility of finding an
answer to the question posed, which makes the legitimation offered by
teaching all the more necessary\". This pain remains delicious. The
isolation from the media and social noise required by the mathematical
work, this ideal journey, leads him to favor real journeys - as when he
goes to Brazil to cogitate with a colleague crossing the same
calculative waters - in order to conduct this intense mental labor.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1357

Green light for the open source carThere is strength in numbers. This
obvious fact is likely to become an economic model. After IT, the logic
of open source has reached the automotive sector, notably via the \"C,
mm, n\" project (pronounced \"Common\"). Thanks to the collective
thinking of the environmental association Stichting Natuur en Milieu,
the universities of Delft, Enschede and Eindhoven and companies such as
Philips and Shell, a green car model is currently under construction.
Expected release: 2020. Internet users, get typing for your comments and
suggestions. Here, we are at the antipodes of the industrial secrecy
that surrounds all the green prototypes currently being developed by car
manufacturers. On the \"C, mm, n\" website, all the technical
information and plans are available. A first model was even presented in
April 2007 at the AutoRAI show in Amsterdam. Inside the concept car,
there are many technological innovations geared towards the collective.
Information sharing systems on traffic conditions, parking availability,
and journeys are planned. A sort of road Wikipedia, if you will. The
small four-seater city car will have no metal parts, but will be riddled
with recyclable plastic and will be powered by a hydrogen-powered fuel
cell. Anne Bate http://www.autoindetoekomst.nl A tram as beautiful as a
truck In Amsterdam, some trams do not stop at all the stations. Two of
them, to be exact. They use the same tracks as the others, from 7 a.m.
to 11 p.m. But they do not transport passengers. Only goods and raw
materials. These rather unusual shuttles, called \"cargo trams\", were
introduced in March 2007 to reduce heavy goods traffic within the city.
Their mission: to provide a link between logistics centres, train
stations and supply hubs on the outskirts and supermarkets, shops and
restaurants in the city centre. City cargo, this pilot project, was
inspired by the manufacturer Volkswagen, which has been transporting its
parts by tram to its site in Dresden (Germany) for six years now.
Currently, a \"cargo tram\" transports the equivalent of four 7.5-ton
semi-trailers. Amsterdam has had its calculators running: with 50
\"cargo trams\" in operation every day, the inhabitants of the City of
1,000 Canals would escape the daily nuisance of 2,500 trucks. With this
system, the number of traffic jams and noise pollution would drop, and
the bill for road maintenance would decrease considerably. At the same
time, CO2 emissions would drop and 1,200 jobs could be created around
this new distribution chain. Pauline Hervé http://www.citycargo.nl The
highway code, a path to explore What if the rules invented in the 1920s
were no longer fully adapted to city traffic? Motivated by the Belgian
example, where the highway code was amended accordingly in 2004, several
associations are calling for the establishment in France of a \"highway
code\" that would redefine the relationships between the different means
of transport in the city. With one objective: the systematic protection
of the most vulnerable users (pedestrians, cyclists, disabled people,
etc.) from cars. Among the measures proposed: generalize two-way cycle
lanes allowing bicycles to use one-way traffic in the opposite
direction, authorize cyclists to turn right on a red light, increase the
number of crossing sidewalks (roughly speaking, pedestrian crossings on
speed bumps), create \"meeting zones\" limited to 20 km/h where
pedestrians would have priority over cars, including on the roadway,
etc. The National Transport Council\'s report of June 2005, A road
network for all, recommends studying the highway code. A commission
bringing together government departments and associations was set up in
2006. \"All that\'s missing is a little political will,\" assures Jean
Sivardière, of the National Federation of Transport User Associations.
Guillaume Launay A second wind for sailing navigation An 11 million euro
bet. That of reviving the merchant navy under sail. But the Compagnie de
transport maritime à la voile (CTMV) is not sailing on the nostalgia of
old sailing ships. Its founders Frédéric Albert, grandson of a
winemaker, Frédéric Girard, specialist in import-export logistics,
Michel Péry, one of the commanders of the Bélem, and Philippe Videau,
one of the founders of the Compagnie des îles du Ponant are looking
offshore. They are banking on \"the first sustainable, innovative,
modern and clean transport\". To achieve this, the three friends have
launched the construction of two boats, the first of which should be
afloat at the end of 2008. \"They are all-steel sailing boats, 47 metres
long and with a capacity of 210 tonnes, for which we had to delve back
into the plans of boats from the beginning of the century. Then we
worked with rigging specialists and the National School of Engineers of
Armament Techniques in Brest to hone their hydrodynamics,\" says a
manager from Ship Studio, the naval engineering firm in charge of the
project. In the holds, there will be only Languedoc-Roussillon wine.
Naturally cooled to 15 degrees, thanks to a system using the sea
temperature, the bottles will initially be sent to Ireland. This
four-day voyage will be carried out 75% of the time under sail. For
maneuvers that are impossible under rigging or in case of calm, an
engine running on rapeseed oil will be used. Currently, 55 producers
from the region, gathered in the Sud Export group, have given their
support to this adventure. And will promote this ecological transport
with a specific logo on their vintage. Another way to raise consumer
awareness. Anne Bate http://www.ctmv.eu

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1358

The Ile-de-France region has decided to provide a USB key to each of the
155,000 high school students in their second year and the 18,000
apprentices in their first year, as well as to each of their 40,000
teachers, in October. Each USB key contains 19 free software programs.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1359

OPERATION seduction yesterday at the National Assembly. Steve Ballmer,
the president of Microsoft, responded to the invitation of French
parliamentarians before going to Sciences Po to announce a partnership
agreement with the famous grandes écoles. In front of thirty or so
deputies packed into a small room, Steve Ballmer delivered a plea in
favor of innovation. In France, the group has committed itself in
several ways to this area. Two years ago, Microsoft invented a
sponsorship of start-ups, called Idee. The group does not allocate any
financial resources. It provides them with all the technical and
material means that the founders of start-ups need. It supports them in
their search for major clients or venture capitalists. \"This year, 25
companies will be selected as part of the third edition of Idee,\"
recalls Julien Codorniou, who heads this program. Overall, this support
indirectly costs Microsoft 50,000 euros per year and per start-up.\"
After a little over two years, the results of this initiative are
encouraging: the sponsored companies have raised 3 million euros each
and recruited 16 people on average since 2005. Since its inception, 550
jobs have been created. This \"idea\" has been taken up in around
fifteen European countries, in Israel, China, India and Russia, as well
as in the United States. Yesterday, Dassault Systèmes announced that it
had just acquired one of them, Seemage, without revealing the amount of
the transaction. In front of the elected officials, Steve Ballmer also
recalled the agreement signed with Inria (National Institute for
Research in Computer Science and Automation). \"Fifty researchers from
Inria and Microsoft work together, publish and file patents jointly.\"
Weakness on the Internet \"Tomorrow, everything will be digitized,
books, documents. The impact will also be on culture and art.
\"Digitalization will break down the barriers of communication,\"
predicted the Microsoft president, citing 75 revolutionary ideas
presented in the framework of a five-year scenario. \"You will come into
a room and when you talk about a subject, thanks to voice recognition,
you will have a card that will automatically appear on the wall to
illustrate your words,\" he cited as an example. But the presentation
became more complicated when the parliamentarians asked politically
incorrect questions about the leadership of Google in the Internet or
Sony in games consoles. Or when one MP recalled that the
parliamentarians did not have Microsoft software on their computers but,
on the contrary, free software. Another even asked Steve Ballmer to talk
about the major failures that would have improved diversity and
competition in the information society. \"Not wanting to go into the
Internet in 2000 was not a good idea,\" he acknowledged. \"We were too
slow. But we are working hard to rectify these mistakes. » He also
discussed the \"social issues\" raised by the development of new
technologies such as respect for privacy with the Internet. A theme for
Sciences Po students. VALÉRIE COLLET

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1360

It\'s not every day that the CEO of Microsoft has the opportunity to
visit a \"Windows free\" space. This was the case yesterday, during
Steve Ballmer\'s visit to the National Assembly, received at his request
by the elected members of the Internet study group of the UMP deputy of
Loir-et-Cher Patrice Martin-Lalande. The boss of the company, whose
software equips nine out of ten computers worldwide and who once called
Linux a \"cancer\", spoke without getting upset in front of deputies
whose workstations have rallied to the banner of free software! \"There
is a new economic model with people ready to work almost voluntarily to
create products,\" explained the CEO of Microsoft to the twenty or so
deputies present. \"It\'s up to us to offer better.\" Two weeks after
its condemnation by the European Court of Justice for abuse of a
dominant position, the Microsoft machine came to convince the deputies
that it has changed and that it wants to work towards the development of
the information society in Sarkozy\'s country. Outlining a world in
which an inch of LCD screen will soon be cheaper to produce than a
square centimeter of blackboard, the boss of Microsoft highlighted his
company\'s recent commitments in France: co-financing of a research
laboratory with Inria (1), participation in the \"Ideas\" program from
which French start-ups benefit and signing, yesterday, a partnership
with Sciences-Po to support two chairs of \"scientific humanities\" and
\"regulation\" of intellectual property. He returned to the
manufacturer\'s defeat against the European Commission. \"Microsoft will
comply with the legislation in force,\" he continued, specifying that it
is up to governments and not multinationals to set the rules. A speech
well received by the Assembly. \"Microsoft is aware that it is
vulnerable and must focus on innovation rather than on its vested
interests so as not to find itself pushed to the periphery,\" responded
the socialist Christian Paul, who prefers this strategy of open
seduction rather than \"corridor lobbying in Brussels.\" \"They realize
that they are no longer the masters of everything,\" concluded Patrice
Martin-Lalande, who expects results in the area of interoperability,
this compatibility between systems in which Microsoft plays a key role.
Christophe Alix (1) National Institute for Research in Computer Science
and Automation.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1361

It\'s not every day that the CEO of Microsoft has the opportunity to
visit a \"Windows free\" space. This was the case yesterday, during
Steve Ballmer\'s visit to the National Assembly, received at his request
by the elected members of the Internet study group of the UMP deputy of
Loir-et-Cher Patrice Martin-Lalande. The boss of the company, whose
software equips nine out of ten computers worldwide and who once called
Linux a \"cancer\", spoke without getting upset in front of deputies
whose workstations have rallied to the banner of free software! \"There
is a new economic model with people ready to work almost voluntarily to
create products,\" explained the CEO of Microsoft to the twenty or so
deputies present. \"It\'s up to us to offer better.\" Two weeks after
its condemnation by the European Court of Justice for abuse of a
dominant position, the Microsoft machine came to convince the deputies
that it has changed and that it wants to work towards the development of
the information society in Sarkozy\'s country. Outlining a world in
which an inch of LCD screen will soon be cheaper to produce than a
square centimeter of blackboard, the boss of Microsoft highlighted his
company\'s recent commitments in France: co-financing of a research
laboratory with Inria (1), participation in the \"Ideas\" program from
which French start-ups benefit and signing, yesterday, a partnership
with Sciences-Po to support two chairs of \"scientific humanities\" and
\"regulation\" of intellectual property. He returned to the
manufacturer\'s defeat against the European Commission. \"Microsoft will
comply with the legislation in force,\" he continued, specifying that it
is up to governments and not multinationals to set the rules. A speech
well received by the Assembly. \"Microsoft is aware that it is
vulnerable and must focus on innovation rather than on its vested
interests so as not to find itself pushed to the periphery,\" responded
the socialist Christian Paul, who prefers this strategy of open
seduction rather than \"corridor lobbying in Brussels.\" \"They realize
that they are no longer the masters of everything,\" concluded Patrice
Martin-Lalande, who expects results in the area of interoperability,
this compatibility between systems in which Microsoft plays a key role.
Christophe Alix (1) National Institute for Research in Computer Science
and Automation.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1362

The European Commission won a great victory against Microsoft on Monday,
September 17, when its conviction for \"abuse of a dominant position\"
of the world\'s number one software company was largely confirmed by the
court of first instance at the European Court of Justice. Brussels will
now be in a better position to demand that the American champion change
its business practices. But isn\'t this already a rearguard action in a
sector - technology - where competitive positions often evolve very
quickly? And what if, in the Internet era, the most worrying industrial
dominations were already elsewhere? The question is likely to make
competitors and fans of free software (free and open programs) jump, who
believe that Microsoft continues to enjoy unbearable market power in the
PC world, stifling its challengers and hindering consumers\' freedom of
choice. It is true that, more than twenty years after the launch of the
first versions of its two flagship products - its Windows operating
system and its Office suite - the company founded in 1975 by Bill Gates
still equips more than nine out of ten computers in the world. However,
this is the feeling of some financial analysts, who now consider
Microsoft less of a threat to the rest of the high-tech industry than a
fortress attacked from all sides on its core businesses. And a giant
overtaken by newcomers who are more agile in Web services, and who are
promised great commercial futures. Its Zune digital music player thus
pales in comparison to Apple\'s iPod, which, coupled with its iTunes
Music Store online music purchasing program, is said to hold more than
half of the digital music market. The search engine of its MSN portal
comes largely behind Google, used for more than half of the queries made
online today. The latter has become so essential on the Web that it is
starting to arouse feelings of concern, like Microsoft a few years ago.
The Internet could even lead to a rethinking of the notions of monopoly
and dominant position. In fact, online, an application, a service or a
site seem to be able to establish themselves much more quickly than in
the real world, the network allowing information to circulate instantly
and reach a very large number of users simultaneously. When Google
launched the first version of its search engine in the late 1990s, it
only took a few days for Internet users to definitively abandon one of
the leaders of the time, Altavista. And what if, in the era of the
Internet, the most worrying industrial dominations were already
different?

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1363

THE CONFIRMATION, on Monday 17 September, by the Court of First Instance
(CFI) at the European Court of Justice of Microsoft\'s conviction for
\"abuse of a dominant position\", opens a new era for the European
guardians of competition. Neelie Kroes, the Commissioner in charge of
this case, was pleased to be now in a position to force the software
publisher to comply with the corrective measures ordered in 2004 in
order to change its commercial practices. \"I will not tolerate any
persistent violation\" of these remedies, she warned, while the
Commission must say in the coming weeks whether the American giant has
indeed communicated the documentation necessary to ensure
interoperability between its operating system and the servers of its
rivals. Brussels is now also in a strong position to broaden its
investigations into Bill Gates\' company. \"This is about investigating
complaints filed against other Microsoft applications,\" said Thomas
Vinje, lawyer for the ECIS association, which brings together groups
such as IBM and Nokia, which filed a complaint against Microsoft\'s
Internet services and its Office suite. Beyond the Microsoft case, the
Commission\'s entire action on abuses of dominant positions could be
strengthened. \"This ruling is revenge for the setbacks suffered in
merger cases in 2002. It will open up breaches against dominant
positions in technology \[Intel and Qualcomm are already the subject of
proceedings\] but also in energy, where Brussels has opened proceedings
against GDF, EDF and E. ON,\" said Antoine Winckler, lawyer for the
Cleary Gottlieb firm. NEELIE KROES\' CRUSADE This possible toughening is
not to the taste of the American authorities, or of some of Microsoft\'s
allies. The US Justice Department has expressed concern that \"the
criteria applied by the Court, rather than helping consumers, have the
unfortunate consequence of harming them by discouraging innovation and
competition.\" The US position could change if the Democrats return to
power next year. \"Microsoft lost, but we don\'t know what will happen
to the rest of the industry: will Ms Kroes lead a crusade to poison
successful companies?\" worried the Association for Competitive
Technologies (ACT), a group of technology companies. \"Disappointed\" by
the CFI ruling, Brad Smith, Microsoft\'s number three, has pledged \"to
respect every point of the decision\", while leaving doubts hanging over
a new appeal before the European courts. Representatives of the American
computer giant say, however, that they want to learn from their European
legal troubles, which began in the late 1990s. \"We have learned that
being in a dominant position gives us responsibilities,\" assures Marc
Mossé, director of legal affairs for Microsoft in France. \"We have
changed. The Microsoft of 2007 is no longer the one of ten years ago,\"
he assures. In fact, perhaps thanks to - or because of - the accusations
from Brussels, Microsoft is collaborating with some of its rivals in
order to improve the interoperability of their respective products. The
publisher thus signed a partnership in 2004 with Sun, the manufacturer
of computer servers, which was at the origin of the complaint in
Brussels in 2000. More recently, it announced an agreement with Novell,
publisher of operating systems based on the free software Linux, one of
the main competitors, with Apple, of its flagship Windows system.
\"These rapprochements probably come from the conviction of Microsoft\'s
executives that their monopoly on PC software is becoming a handicap.
Each time they launch a new product, they are suspected of wanting to
lock their customers into proprietary systems,\" according to Emmanuel
Tricot, a lawyer at the firm Hogan & Hartson.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1364

The computer group IBM is to launch, on Tuesday, September 18, a series
of free office software, which will compete directly with Microsoft
Office software, according to the Wall Street Journal. This software
suite, called Symphony and downloadable free of charge on the Internet,
includes a word processor, a spreadsheet and a presentation software.
Symphony is based on the free software Open Office. A profit of 5.6
billion dollars in 2007 for the airline industry The International Air
Transport Association (IATA) revised upwards, on Monday, September 17,
its profit forecast for the entire sector worldwide, now targeting 5.6
billion dollars (4 billion euros) in 2007 against a previous estimate of
5.1 billion dollars. For 2008, however, the association revised its
forecast downwards: 7.7 billion dollars against 9.6 billion dollars, due
in particular to the price of a barrel of oil. Deutsche Bahn
privatisation criticised by three states Three German states on Monday
17 September drew up a list of criticisms against the federal
government\'s planned privatisation of the state-owned railway company
Deutsche Bahn (DB), which could derail a project that has already been
postponed several times. The transport ministers of Saxony-Anhalt,
Brandenburg and North Rhine-Westphalia have indicated that the regional
states could block the law in the upper house (Bundesrat). The regional
states fear that once privatised, the DB will neglect small local routes
and close some stations. US courts dismiss complaint against
manufacturers over global warming Federal judge Martin Jenkins, sitting
in San Francisco, dismissed on Monday 17 September a complaint filed by
the state of California against car manufacturers, accused of
contributing to global warming. The judge ruled in favor of six American
and Japanese groups, which considered the civil lawsuits filed against
them a year ago by Bill Lockyer, California\'s attorney general, to be
unfounded. The complaint, filed on behalf of \"the people of
California,\" sought damages of an unspecified amount. It claimed that
the car manufacturers had created a \"public nuisance\" by producing
\"millions of vehicles that collectively emit massive amounts of carbon
dioxide.\" Rio Tinto extends its offer for Alcan until October 23 The
Anglo-Australian mining giant Rio Tinto decided on Monday, September 17,
to extend its friendly offer (OPA) for Alcan until October 23 to \"allow
the conditions of the offer to be satisfied, including obtaining the
green light from several regulatory authorities.\" Rio Tinto, had only
received 0.2% of Alcan shares as of September 14. According to Rio
Tinto, Alcan shareholders are waiting for the mining group\'s general
meeting to be held on September 28 in Melbourne. This meeting must give
the green light to the \$38.1 billion (€27.5 billion) takeover bid. The
Netherlands gives the green light to the takeover of ABN Amro On Monday,
September 17, the Netherlands gave the green light to the takeover of
ABN Amro, the kingdom\'s leading banking institution, by a consortium of
three banks led by the British Royal Bank of Scotland (RBS), as it had
given to the rival offer from the British Barclays. Meilleurtaux.com
finalizes its round of financing The management of meilleurtaux.com has
completed its round of financing as part of the sale of the credit
broker. In addition to the founders, who would only keep 4%, Macif would
hold 9%, Maif 9% and Nexity 3%. The Caisses d\'Epargne, which were
initially supposed to take control, will ultimately only hold 35%. The
bank is expected to launch a takeover bid for the broker at a maximum
price of 41 euros. However, the new shareholders want to put 40% of the
capital back on the stock market at the end of the deal.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1365

It is not often, if not never, that Microsoft bites the dust to this
extent. While the world leader in IT had until now always managed to
avoid any jurisdiction drastically challenging its commercial policy,
the Court of First Instance (CFI) at the European Court of Justice in
Luxembourg yesterday inflicted an unprecedented defeat on the American
giant. Eight years after the start of the titanic \"Microsoft v. the
European Union\" case, the magistrates largely confirmed the validity of
the conviction of the multinational for \"abuse of a dominant position\"
pronounced in March 2004 by the Brussels Commission. Yes, the CFI ruled,
Microsoft did indeed abuse its \"quasi-monopoly on the market for
operating systems \[with which it equips 95% of personal computers,
editor\'s note\] in order to restrict competition\". Yes, it judged, the
corrective measures imposed by Brussels to remedy this state of affairs
were entirely justified. Record. The most immediate effect of a decision
supported by more than 100 pages is to ratify the record fine (777
million euros in total) imposed by the European authorities on the firm
founded by Bill Gates. But the essential is elsewhere, as summarized by
François Lévêque, professor of economics at the École des Mines de
Paris: \"The CFI considered that the exceptional situation that
Microsoft is in on its market perfectly legitimized the obligation
imposed by Brussels to open the floodgates of its intellectual property.
It is a decision that could change a lot of things in the future.\"
While many predicted a mixed judgment due to the incredible complexity
of the case, the CFI ruled in favor of the Commission on the two main
points of dispute. He followed suit in his refusal to endorse the tying
of Media Player (audio and video file playback software) with Windows,
which allowed Microsoft to eliminate any serious competition in this
market and to considerably weaken alternative solutions such as that of
Real Network. And, to those who are ironic about the failure of the
\"remedy\" (the sale of an operating system without Media Player), the
European Commissioner for Competition, Neelie Kroes, replied that if it
is up to the customer to choose, he must still have the choice. Even
more importantly, the court also approved Brussels\' fight to force
Microsoft to implement interoperability in servers (compatibility
between different systems) by providing better technical documentation
to its competitors. Buoyed by what she calls a \"major victory for
consumers,\" Kroes made it clear that she now wants to see \"a
substantial decline\" in Microsoft\'s market share, and that she will do
everything she can to ensure that the company complies with its
obligations as quickly as possible. Despite his defeat, Microsoft\'s
number three and legal battle strategist, Brad Smith, held press
conferences in Luxembourg in the morning and then in Brussels in the
early afternoon. A good loser, keeping a low profile, he called the
court\'s decision \"disappointing\" while repeating that Microsoft would
comply with the Commission\'s demands as quickly as possible. Above all,
he sought to debunk the idea that Microsoft\'s dominance had been a
brake on innovation in recent years by recalling the agreements signed
by the group on interoperability (with Nokia, Sun and even Novell, a
player in free software) and that the company\'s investments in research
on the Old Continent had gone from 3 million dollars to 500 today. In
short, that the Microsoft of today is no longer that of yesterday.
\"Microsoft is trying to pass off this decision as anachronistic,\"
judges François Lévêque. But that is not the point. By ruling in favor
of the Commission, the CFI\'s decision serves to produce future effects
much more than to correct past situations that can no longer be
corrected.\" Procedure. Microsoft now has two months and ten days to
appeal a decision that can no longer be annulled on the merits but only
for procedural reasons. \"Nothing has been decided yet,\" Brad Smith
temporized, \"we must read the ruling calmly and think seriously before
making such a decision.\" At the end of the afternoon, Microsoft shares
were down 1.21% in Europe and 0.9% on the Nasdaq where it is listed.
CHRISTOPHE ALIX WITH JULIE MAJERCZAK (in Brussels)

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1366

God came up with the idea of designing the world all by himself and did
pretty well. As for the innovations that have set the pace for progress,
most of them are the result of personal intuitions (Leonardo da Vinci
and Jules Verne continue to inspire fantasies today), of seemingly
selfish needs (the Walkman was born from the desire of Akito Morita,
president of Sony at the time, to listen to music while playing golf),
of solitary observations (James Dyson invented the bagless vacuum
cleaner even though he didn\'t have the technical skills but was faced
with a question: how come my vacuum cleaner doesn\'t suck when the bag
is only half full?). Or of daring experiments (the Post-itÆ, the result
of an engineer who developed a glue that peels off, is rather disruptive
for a company that makes adhesives!). Or even personal chance: such as
the myth of Roquefort discovered by a shepherd who had left a loaf of
bread lying around with milk that had fermented\... Serge Tisseron is in
the habit of saying that every invention is the realization of a
fantasy. At the dawn of this third millennium where relationships and
transparency are the new refrains of the hyperlinks that we all want to
weave, it is now the ability to innovate together and to produce ideas
collectively that seems to have become the way to realize this fantasy.
Three ruptures have favored this evolution: the place taken by
innovation as a management tool; the abundant interactivity of Web 2.0;
the development of service economies. What connection could there
possibly be between the RATP, the Creative Commons collective, Boursin
cheese, the Icelandic singer Björk, the Swedish Linux, the new Fiat 500,
the sites YouTube.com or MySpace.com, the French initiative Wat.tv,
Mastercard, Findus, IBM\'s innovation jam, the Apple site ipodlounge,
the Dove brand, Agoravox, the universals Wikipedia, Citizendium or
answers.com, the Korean ohMyNews, the Americans Threadless, Boeing or
Mom Inventors, or even EDF and Al Gore\'s Current TV\...? All of them
have opened up their creative process by inviting employees from
different departments of the company, or customers or consumers, to get
involved in something that a priori has nothing to do with them: design.
After innovation at all levels of the company (cycle of the 1990s), the
time has perhaps come when the doors of the company fly open to invite
customers into the kitchen of the design of new initiatives. Welcome to
an Ikea economy where we do the work! All studies confirm it: the end
customer is becoming more and more marketing expert; he gets involved in
his relationship with the issuers of offers that are the brands, no
longer hesitates to contest when he considers that this relationship is
unsatisfactory, begins to resist (cf. the attraction to hard discount or
free\...), or even boycotts (cf. the viral spread on the Internet). On
the business side, human resources management is becoming more and more
problematic due to growing demotivation. On the other hand, markets are
increasingly porous, making brands potentially competitors of each
other. This phenomenon finds its counterpart through the growing
transparency of the boundaries between the company and customers.
Permanent referendum To guarantee success, from now on, let\'s involve
employees and customers to make them authors, designers and ambassadors
of the offers that they will be consumers of tomorrow. And let\'s enter
fully into the new economy of collective imagination. 2006 saw the
emergence of Web 2.0; innovation has its network, it is now global. And
above all, it is co-piloted by you and us. In a kind of democratic
marketing by permanent referendum. This platform for exchanges,
interactivity, creativity and design is part of a movement that sees
citizens, consumers and users take an active part in their exchanges
with the authorities, brands or the media. Jeff Howe of Wired magazine
called this phenomenon \"crowdsourcing\", a principle that calls on the
wisdom of the crowd to invent. The best example of crowdsourcing is
Innocentive, a site initiated by Elli Lilly where researchers from all
sides (different countries, different companies, different expertise,
etc.) can contribute and be paid for it to jointly identify solutions to
problems submitted online\... by other companies. Not a day goes by
without a new collective design initiative. What critical perspective
could we bring to it through a few concrete cases? Linux laid the
foundations for this co-design by inventing OpenSource, which allows
enthusiasts (not necessarily professionals) to improve a beta version of
software and thus become co-authors. More recently, Intel announced at
the end of 2006 that it was offering \$300,000 to customers who would
come up with winning innovations. The winners were chosen at the Spring
Intel Developer Forum held in March 2007 in San Francisco. And at the
end of December 2006, Time magazine elected \"You\" as its personality
of the year. In his editorial, Richard Stengel, the editor-in-chief,
explains that this nomination is a tribute to what he calls the advent
of \"user generated content\". This new collective behavior should,
according to him, transform art, politics and commerce through the
creative and relevant intervention of amateurs. When the RATP launches
its participatory blog Vous-et-la-ratp.net, it is so that users and
employees can invent and suggest improvements to the service. Which will
then be selected and judged good to launch. But are these real customers
who contribute? It is also EDF which is using the pretext of the launch
of three new services (SuiviConso, Objectif Travaux and an e-shop) to
launch into group design. To promote these new services, EDF created
four \"unfinished\" advertising spots allowing Internet users to choose
between several endings, several settings and several music tracks, by
encouraging them to visit a site: www.lepouvoirdechoisir.com. Across the
Atlantic, the Dove brand provided consumers with simple editing
software, photos, music. In short, everything they needed to create the
new DoveCreamOil.com advert dedicated to the product of the same name.
\"You don\'t need any experience or any special skills,\" stated the
email. Since the summer of 2006, Fiat has encouraged its fans around the
world to be creative during the launch of the new Fiat 500. Contributors
were invited to submit their ideas on the site www.fiat500.com/lab
around five themes (design, lifestyle, accessories, stores,
communication). The British public, meanwhile, has been invited to take
part in the largest blog in history, designed to leave future
generations with a record of a typical day in Britain in the 21st
century, which will be preserved at the British Library. Launched by
British heritage organisations, the One day in History project invited
all UK residents to record their day on 17 October 2006 on a shared blog
(www.historymatters.co.uk). The country\'s 29,000 schools have also been
invited to take part. On Second Life, Toyota is presenting a pixelated
version of its latest SUV, the Scion xB, and is inviting potential
buyers to improve its features and customise it as they wish.
Consumer-buyers are dead, long live consumer-creators! Chicago-based
Threadless makes T-shirts whose designs are based exclusively on online
competitions with creative people from all walks of life. The four
projects that obtain the best pre-order rates are launched into
production each week. The winners are offered \$2,000 and their name is
promoted on the garment. Only advantages: saving on a team of designers,
guaranteeing good involvement from future customers who play the role of
buyer-selectors, limiting the risk of failure during marketing. In
Japan, the distributor Muji via its community site www.muji.net solicits
ideas for new products or services from its customers and asks them to
pre-evaluate these ideas. The selection is then entrusted to
professionals responsible for implementation and technical
specifications. Rather than investing in heavy studies, Muji tests the
completed projects with this same community of Muji addicts. If at least
300 people pre-order the new idea, it is put into production. Each
month, the Top 10 best sellers are highlighted on the site, encouraging
the system to feed itself. One of the most impressive examples of
collective design is probably www.aswarmofangels: it involves
co-designing and co-financing an entire film. Welcome to the era of
cinema 2.0! It is an English initiative by Matt Hanson, film critic and
founder of the first online film festival. Contributors (angels)
subscribe around £25 (50 euros). 50,000 \"angels\" will be enough to
raise the necessary budget (estimated at 2 million euros overall). A
thousand angels have already registered and two scripts (entitled The
Glitch and The Untold) are in preparation. They will be tested with the
community swarm to choose the one that will be finalized. The filming
will also be done collectively. Once the project is finalized, the
angels will also be responsible for its promotion and distribution. The
film will be available for free download on the Internet, under a
Creative Commons license. It remains to be seen how good it is\...
Communication alibi Have we entered a monstrous, unmanageable mess? Most
of the initiatives mentioned here have proven to be real messes to be
developed and run. In order not to be overwhelmed by the creative
overflows coming from within and outside, collective design requires a
team of enthusiastic pilot animators. Furthermore, collective design,
however sincere it may be, is often only a communication alibi. Thus, in
October 2006, Boursin asked Internet users on its site for their most
creative recipes using Boursin Cuisine. The ten most original (edible?)
were rewarded with a half-day of learning with the media chef Cyril
Lignac. The first 10,000 participants received a recipe guide using
Boursin Cuisine, signed by the same chef. Another mistake: thinking that
creating collectively is systematically collective. It\'s tempting, but
unmanageable. Like team sports, it\'s often the aggregation of
complementary individuals that creates the spark. And above all, it\'s
the alternation of collective and individual phases, where everyone
brings their specific expertise, that will guarantee the birth of
convincing initiatives. It must be admitted that the result is often
quite disappointing: Wat.tv is currently quite poor in content; and most
of the nice ideas submitted on www.ipodlounge.com (where the prototypes
presented are all of external origin, which puts a nice pressure on the
engineers in the company: \"Look at what our customers themselves are
capable of designing without us\...!\") turn out to be technically
unrealizable by Apple. Another drawback of collective design:
questioning. Thus, the Ideastorm initiative, launched in February 2007
by Dell, a computer giant, with its customer community. More than a
million visits, more than 7,000 suggestions generated\... many of which
did not go in the direction of the decisions that Dell management had
planned. Another temptation: to believe that anyone can create
collectively. Some artists, designers or creators, are truly autistic
and cannot conceive of being mixed with other creative people, worse,
with amateurs. There is also a perverse effect: to suggest that the
company is no longer capable of surprising its customers and that it
needs them for that. The delegation of creativity can then turn into a
perceived resignation. The result is sometimes disappointing also
because the collective initiative is paralyzed by its ambition: the idea
dies because it is too politically correct, or requires a lot of courage
and pugnacious energy. For the result of a collective design approach to
be better than if it did not exist, and for the collective creative mess
not to explode in flight, five conditions must be respected: 1/ mutual
trust (a client who doubts the sincerity of the approach will not get
involved); 2/ a clearly identified problem, which a creative community
would be better able to solve than an isolated researcher; 3/ an
agitator moderator (often a consultant, guardian of the temple and of
mutual requirement); 4/ a fine cruise control to pilot the process. And,
finally; 5/ a method of remuneration consistent with the stakes (thus,
recently, YouTube resigned itself to paying people who send it videos).
When the creative community is piloted without ulterior motives, when it
invites collaborators, clients and citizens to get involved by clearly
explaining to them the real stakes and the rules of the game, then, yes,
the result can be convincing. And will strengthen, let\'s not mince
words, the pride of having purchased a truly special good or service,
since these new kind of creatives will have contributed to designing it.
A new nervous system is being created that will change the way we
perceive the world. But also the way the world changes. Its consequences
are both difficult to know and impossible to estimate. Many creative
dreamers will arrive, will they succeed in learning to play with others?
l brice auckenthaler, partner of Experts Consulting, innovation
management, teacher and author of \"l\'Imagination collective\"
(Liaisons, 2007).

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1367

In all modesty, it\'s a bit like Christopher Columbus or Lapérouse: you
have an intuition and you have to go and check it out.\" At 56, Marc
Lubin has more than three decades of travel behind him. A former high
mountain guide and group leader, he pursues his passion as a freelancer
by creating new circuits for agencies. \"It\'s a work of clearing the
way and discovery that often begins with reading. Ideas don\'t come out
of nothing.\" In fact, it\'s by reading expedition reports or travel
journals that most guides responsible for reconnaissance find
inspiration. \"Eric Shipton, who was one of the first to spot the south
side of Everest, or Maurice Herzog, who climbed the first 8,000
meters,\" confirms Didier Cour, production director at Terres
d\'Aventure. Many great treks in the Himalayas have also been explored
for mountaineers\...\" His alter ego at the Allibert agency, Didier
Mille, mentions a \"first\" he achieved ten years ago with a group in a
valley in Ladakh, \"following the narration of a 19th-century English
geographer and botanist. I had taken photocopies of his travel diary and
every evening, at the stopover, I read\... It was fantastic.\" There are
also these almost mythical sites, such as the citadel of Alamut, in
northern Iran: Sylvain Philip, from Hommes et Montagnes, went there on
the trail of Hassan Ibn Saba, the \"Old Man of the Mountain\", master of
the Assassin sect, which was rampant in the 11th century. Treasures. The
rare pearl detected, it remains to be seen whether the reality lives up
to the original intuition. Because the landscapes are being damaged,
roads are appearing, houses are being built\... By searching for
information on the Internet, by questioning small local agencies when
they exist, by using networks of local guides or local carriers, the
guides try to get a closer look at their new El Dorado. \"A trip is a
pyramid of knowledge,\" explains Tamera, a tour operator in Lyon. And
the talent is asking the right questions.\" In this part of the Sahara,
are there cave paintings? Are there dunes? What shapes are they? \"It\'s
really exciting,\" continues Jacques Chatelet, founder of Tamera. \"And
when you find something, you feel like you\'ve found a treasure.\" Then
comes the time to explore the terrain, with its logistical, political
and geographical considerations. \"The desert is a real little
expedition. You can\'t go wrong with water or food,\" explains Jean
David, a Sahara specialist at Allibert. The legend of the camel that
doesn\'t eat is indeed a legend\... It eats every night.\" \"Ultimately,
it\'s like a movie,\" concludes another guide. \"The client wants to see
the finished product, not thirty hours of rushes\...\" Their next big
treks, their greatest successes? In Venezuela: a waterfall called Salto
Angel, and its 1,000-meter drop. Marc Lubin wants to land there by plane
and then \"rappel down with 50 kg backpacks between his legs.\" At Club
Aventure, Jean Belliot mentions an engagement party among the Lolos, in
northern Vietnam. \"It depends on the rice harvest. Difficult to
schedule. Especially since when you think you\'ve got a date, you
realize that the inhabitants use a lunar calendar and everything has to
be reviewed\...\" There is also this Everest tour that would leave from
the Nepalese base camp to reach the Tibetan slope to the north.
\"Logistically, that wouldn\'t be a problem. But politically, for the
moment, it is unfeasible,\" concludes Didier Cour. This is the last
scenario: the stillborn trip. \"Countries open up and close up again,\"
notes the philosophical Jacques Chatelet, who remembers a trip to Sudan
in 2004, where blockages, setbacks and delays accumulated. \"Finally, we
received the final authorizations but, Ramadan obliges, we had to wait
another twenty-four hours. The next day, we returned to the military
post to learn\... that everything had been canceled. There had been
thirty deaths during the night. The Darfur conflict had just begun.\"
High-trek. Traditional expeditions risk becoming old with the appearance
of new technologies. Such as Google Earth, a free software available on
the Internet, which lists all the satellite views of the Earth in 3D.
With just a few clicks, you can now virtually explore the most remote
places on the planet and prepare almost any itinerary from your desk.
\"In desert areas and mountains, it\'s incredibly precise,\" marvels
Fabrice Oudin, product manager at Nomade. On his screen, he details his
agency\'s Saharan circuits, points out canyons, dune belts or the
presence of oases\... With a movement of the mouse, the map changes to
relief, highlighting the coasts and the differences in altitude. Same
type of technique at Terres d\'Aventure, where Luc Guerrier, a former
computer scientist, has just completed the reconnaissance of a Himalayan
valley between Makalu and Kangchenjunga without having set foot there.
He scanned topographic maps and defined the coordinates of his route,
then visualized his itinerary via Google Earth. On the computer, the
trip seems ready: small pyramids even indicate the location of future
bivouacs. \"Then, you need real field experience to decipher the
views,\" continues Fabrice Oudin, who has thus unearthed real gems in
regions that are currently inaccessible. In Afghanistan, in the
Band-e-Amir region, kilometers of crystal-clear lakes are dotted in the
heart of the mountains. Rare photos gleaned from the Internet confirm
the beauty of the landscapes. \"There, there is an almost pre-planned
journey\... with armed guards,\" laughs the young man. GPS has also
become an essential tool. To establish the complete profile of the trek,
calculate the hours of walking, and record the differences in altitude.
\"Four years ago, we carried out a reconnaissance in a completely
unknown massif, the Nyenpo Yurtse in eastern Tibet,\" explains Didier
Mille. Of course, no map existed. We drew one up from our GPS
measurements. We still use it today\...\" Good to know, some tour
operators offer the \"first\" commercial version of their circuits at
cost price. Other agencies, like Hommes et Montagnes, have their core of
loyal customers. Otherwise, hurry up and sign up for new trips. For
example, this hike around Chinguetti in Mauritania about ten years ago
has since become a Saharan classic. In the evening, bivouacs were set up
on ancient Neolithic sites perfectly preserved by the desert climate. It
was not unusual to find fragments of pottery, arrowheads, fossilized
eggshells\... \"It was great,\" remembers Laurent, \"you could sit in
the very place where nomads had settled 10,000 years ago, and find their
tools, as if they had abandoned them the day before\...\".

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1368

Do you know the Firefox browser? Have you heard of the YouTube video
portal? Miro is exactly at the crossroads of the two: it is a free
software that allows you to subscribe to different online video sources,
including YouTube. Whether you use Windows, a Mac or Linux. This
application categorizes its different sources according to the subject
covered: entertainment, information, technology, etc. It downloads the
selected videos in the background while you browse through its
impressive video library, which also includes several online TV
channels, including some in high definition (HD). The last time we took
a look, Miro gave access to no less than 174 channels in French. That\'s
a lot more than traditional TV, and it\'s completely free. Miro is
available at the following address: www.getmiro.com.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1369

WHILE the Ministry of National Education is renewing the \"Student
Microportable\" operation for the fourth year in order to help young
people equip themselves with laptops that fit their budget, several
hypermarkets and websites are offering laptops for less than 500 euros.
That is a price significantly lower than those offered by the
operation\'s partner manufacturers. Good deal or bad deal? \"Student
Microportable\" is aimed at first-year students. The operation is based
on a partnership with universities, banks, distributors and computer
manufacturers. Finally, it includes a financial component that offers
advantageous payment terms, for example flexible loans without
application fees or repayments of 1 or 2 euros per day over 36 months.
Several major brands are participating in the operation, including
Apple, Asus, Dell, HP, Sony, Toshiba, Fujitsu-Siemens, Elonex and
Packard-Bell. The choice of the models selected is based on
specifications that detail precisely the characteristics of the
products, which are then authorized to bear the label of the operation:
Wi-Fi connectivity, autonomy greater than 3 hours, 1 GB of RAM, hard
drive of at least 120 GB, DVD burner, but also office suite such as
Microsoft Office and various utilities including an antivirus. Some
models have additional components, without this being mandatory, such as
a webcam or a Bluetooth interface. The computer cannot be a destocked
material and must be available in less than forty days. All the models
proposed, which cost between 750 and 2,000 euros, are guaranteed for 2
to 3 years and have after-sales support. However, on closer inspection,
we see that the prices of the laptops selected for the operation are
higher than those of models sold online or in supermarkets. Thus,
Conforama, Fnac and Surcouf are displaying the Fujitsu-Siemens Amilo LA
1703-P3508 on sale for 499 euros. 15.4-inch screen, 120 GB hard drive, 1
GB RAM, dual-layer DVD burner, Wi-Fi connection\... Most of the criteria
seem to be met. Except that this model does not come with an office
suite (you can nevertheless install OpenOffice.org, which is free, or
Microsoft Office from 120 euros) and that its AMD Sempron 3500 +
processor, which is not really optimized for laptops, is a single core
while the \"Student Microportable\" operation recommends a dual core,
more efficient for intensive calculations. Its low price can however be
a decisive factor, provided that it is reserved for basic office use and
that free software or applications are preferably installed. No office
software In terms of performance, we prefer the more modern Amilo Li
1705-P5208, which Darty and Pixmania.fr offer at the same price. It is
equipped with a 1.6 GHz Celeron M520 processor. At GrosBill.com, the
Acer Aspire 3104WLMI-X1012 is listed at 499 euros. Same AMD processor as
the Fujitsu-Siemens Amilo LA 1703, same 120 GB hard drive and 1 GB RAM,
and same accessories (DVD burner, Wi-Fi and 15.4-inch screen). A small
advantage: it comes with Microsoft Works 8.5, which includes a word
processor, a spreadsheet and a data manager. For its part, the Dell site
presents the Inspiron 1501 model at 499 euros (but with a delivery
charge of 30 euros). Light and well designed, it has an AMD Athlon 64
dual-core processor, a 15.4-inch screen, a 120 GB hard drive, 1 GB of
RAM, a 3-in-1 memory card reader, a DVD burner and Wi-Fi connectivity.
This PC comes with the integrated Microsoft Works software, but without
a security utility. As always with Dell, you can change certain
components and add options for an additional fee (for example, count 50
euros for the antivirus and 150 euros for Microsoft Office Basic 2007).
The warranty only lasts 90 days. Superior equipment Overall, the price
difference is justified: between 499 euros for a basic PC, without
advanced software or accessories, and a little over 700 euros for a
high-performance, upgradeable model delivered with ready-to-use
software, the balance weighs in favor of the latter. First advantage of
the models selected for \"Student Microportable\": the use of a
dual-core processor and powerful graphics cards on many of them is a
guarantee of power and allows demanding applications to run,
particularly in the multimedia and gaming fields. Another positive
aspect: the equipment of the labeled products often exceeds the criteria
of the specifications. The least expensive model, the Packard-Bell
EasyNote MX36-R-062 (799 euros in the manufacturer\'s catalog), has a
160 GB hard drive, a webcam and a keyboard with an integrated numeric
keypad. The argument of the financing conditions is also to be taken
into account: the credit rates offered by resellers are generally higher
than those of the operation\'s partners. Finally, the assurance of
having a recent model capable of adapting to technical progress is a
security. In short, while the 499 euro PC may be suitable for taking
your first steps or as a second machine, it is preferable to invest a
few euros more to have sophisticated equipment that will better meet the
work required at university.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1370

COMPUTING. Linux, the free software, is no longer the eternal forgotten
part of the PC shelves of distributors. At the beginning of the week,
two of the main manufacturers, Lenovo and Dell, announced that they were
going to sell machines on which Linux operating systems will be
pre-installed. This is great news for those who want to find an
alternative to Microsoft products, which equip 90% of computers in the
world. The American Dell has led the way. The world number two began
selling PCs equipped with the Linux Ubuntu operating system, designed by
a community of users, in the United States in May. Last Tuesday, Dell
extended this program to the United Kingdom, France, Germany and China.
Now, two models of \"Inspiron\" laptops equipped with Linux are now
marketed in France. For its part, Lenovo plans to sell a whole range of
computers equipped with a free and open source operating system.
Equipped with Novell\'s version of Linux, they should be sold in the
last quarter of the year. According to Raj Aggarwal, head of Lenovo\'s
Thinkpad laptops - acquired from IBM - these PCs could represent 5% of
the group\'s laptop sales in a few years. The general public will be
able to relay the strong demand recorded in the public sector.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1371

Internet Wiki vs. Google Jimmy Wales, co-founder of the online
encyclopedia Wikipedia, is making progress with his participatory search
engine project. His company Wikia has acquired the open-source
technology Grub, which uses the computers of volunteer Internet users.
The first version of this Google competitor should be online by the end
of the year. Press \"Jasmin\" faded In an interview with Le Figaro, Axel
Ganz, founder of the women\'s magazine Jasmin, announced the
discontinuation of the title launched last October. \"I saw that there
was no prospect of making this investment profitable,\" explained the
former head of Prisma Presse. The weekly, launched with 230,000 copies
with a budget of 20 million euros, had stabilised its circulation at
100,000 copies during the first half of 2007. Axel Ganz\'s conclusion:
\"Women have less time to read a new magazine.\" Free Telephony alone in
the running Only the Iliad group, parent company of the Internet access
provider Free, is a candidate for the fourth 3G mobile telephony
license, announced the Telecoms Regulatory Authority (Arcep) on Tuesday.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1372

We are the \"Consumed Revolt\" generation: every counterculture movement
is so quickly spread - thanks to the Internet - that it is immediately
taken up by branding, the super-marketing described by Naomi Klein. The
Rue! festival at the Grand Palais was symbolic: a right-wing minister
inviting graffiti artists to spray paint well within the lines in a
historic building, that confuses the issues. Worse: a department store
sign that imitates the \"ad daubers\" style, another the posters of May
68, it\'s hard to swallow. Clothing marginalism has also become
impossible; the \"lads\" are in Lacoste and the \"bab\'s\" in Benetton.
But our great generational character trait is that ideologically it\'s
like for clothes: it\'s difficult to fight against \"merchandising\".
Especially when the \"tyranny of cool\" is dictated by ourselves: it\'s
difficult to be young when it\'s fashionable to be so. The flagship work
of our generation is Fight Club, a cult film; to oppose brands and the
sad straight line of an orderly life, Jack creates a double for himself
who is as gay as he is heterosexual, as leader as he is an anarchist,
who will set his Ikea apartment on fire and lead a terrorist group as
violent as it is absurd. No opposition to the world order, therefore,
without violent schizophrenia, fighting, fighting to the death,
terrorism and suicide. To top it all off, this base of the underground
that is Fight Club is produced by 20th Century Fox\... See our problem.
For our generation, the Internationale is over, the Béruriers Noirs are
over, make way for Radiohead, Noir Désir and Sinik, much more complex
and psychodramatic. With simple fighting and marginality being
recuperated and becoming trendy, Baudrillard is outdated. The time has
come for Chomsky and his Znet Web network: \"A community of people
committed to social change.\" \"The time has come, closer to us, and
more \"subtle\", to Naomi Klein, Joseph Heath and Andrew Potter, who in
Révolte consommée: le mythe de la contre-culture (ed. Naïve, 2005),
elevate our problematic to the climax. The time is no longer for Sartre,
Marat, it is for sustainable development; it is no longer for left-wing
revolutionaries with beards and paving stones, it is for the \"cool\"
business school student who does ecomarketing. Our generation is
centrist. Peace & love is good, but we cannot allow ourselves such
simplistic views, we are \"pragmatic\". The fact is that
alter-globalization is really complicated. Gone is the head-on
opposition between communists and capitalists, liberalism has won. And
it is not even amoral anymore; Nike had its trial, Noël Forgeard will
have his. With communism swept away, capitalism moralized and
eco-labeled, it becomes difficult to fight against liberalism; difficult
to fight against freedom and individual responsibility. Nicolas Sarkozy
is symptomatic of our generation: while young people expected to be able
to oppose head-on a right-wing president with xenophobic undertones, in
line with the recent Dutch and Austrian elections, they find themselves
stuck in the middle of an uninhibited openness. And all this with the
help of the savior Internet: \"Do you want to rebel? Start a blog.\"
This rebellion will end in SkyBlog, and Skyrock, polite in all respects,
will bring together these embryos of revolt, will make itself their
spokesperson with Diam\'s at the PS and Joey Starr at Ardisson. It\'s a
bit weak. And to cap it all, no left-wing leader is there to recover all
this - cause or consequence, who knows. No more fanzines, goodbye to the
Grand Soir, hello to the quarter of an hour of glory and tidy your
room\... Our generation no longer knows which inequality to devote
itself to, which people to save, which culprit to accuse, and its crisis
lacks targets. A Sarkozyist friend recently retorted to me: \"You want
to help the guys from the suburbs, the countries of the South? Open your
arms to them, and, with your little white face, they will steal your
watch.\" Sad, but difficult to counter. China is coming out of the hole,
with it 1 billion poor people, and the countries of Latin America are
not the object of privileged compassion either since the group of
countries of the South, called G77, was created with an animosity -
quite understandable - towards the condescension of the North; since
also Lula and Chavez disappointed with their aggressiveness,
Ravalomanana with his illuminations. A good part of our generation did
not pity the United States in 2001, which got a bit of what it deserved.
But how can we not denounce terrorism against civilians? And Sharia law?
Same ideological dead end during the fight against the first employment
contract (CPE) and the riots of 2005; compassion for the most
disadvantaged classes of our generation is very present, but its theory
is quickly undermined by the blind violence of the \"thugs\", by the
High Authority for the fight against discrimination and for equality
(Halde), positive discrimination, and even by those who get by. So, our
generation is \"moderate\". And it must be the first! Young \"moderate\"
people who fight for moderate alternatives that do not fight the
\"system\", but integrate into it: sustainable development, fair trade,
free software\... A generation that almost apologizes for throwing
paving stones. A generation where it\'s \"cool\" to be reasonable.
Nothing too serious, it\'s even good. But the overhaul of the left risks
being very weak.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1373

\"IT\'S BEIRUT!\" Stepping over the rubble, this National Assembly agent
is furious. For a year, part of the Assembly has been under construction
and he had more or less gotten used to it. But since June 17, the 577
deputies have arrived, and he has to deal with a chorus of lamentations
in the corridors. \"It\'s simple, I have neither telephone nor
computer,\" complains this deputy. \"I was offered a tiny room in the
attic: no place to install my assistant, no possibility of sleeping in
Paris,\" explains this former minister who finally won his case and got
a larger space. \"I\'m lucky, I have a telephone line. But I have to
write my amendments, because there is no computer connection,\" says
Guillaume Garot (PS). In principle, there are more than 600 offices
available for some 577 deputies. They are divided between the Palais
Bourbon itself, 233, boulevard Saint-Germain, rue Aristide-Briand, 101,
rue de l\'Université and, since July 1, 103 of the same street. At each
new legislature, the quaestors, who are the great treasurers of the
Assembly, calculate the number of rooms to which the political parties
are entitled. It is then the leaders of the political groups who
distribute them. \"There is some bargaining\" There begins a first arm
wrestling match: \"In general, the deputies want to be housed at the
Palais Bourbon, close to the administrators, the commissions and the
power\", indicates a deputy from the East, who adds: \"But there is
little room, because the building is old.\" It is therefore necessary to
convince most of them to go into exile elsewhere. In any case, whatever
the location, the size of the offices varies from single to double.
\"There is some bargaining. And we understand that decisions are made at
the client\'s head,\" grumbles a deputy. \"The premises of 233 are far
away: they put the blues like me there,\" says a newly elected deputy.
As a head of the quaestorship modestly points out, \"the parties have
their own distribution criteria.\" This year, the tension was clearly
focused on the UMP group, which had to \"give back\" fifty offices to
the opposition. And then there are the famous works, which concern
25,000 m². From July 2006 to the end of 2008, thirty-year-old
outbuildings will be renovated. The aim is to transform 10 m² rooms into
double offices, with bathrooms and the possibility of having a corner
for the assistant. \"It was a strong request from the deputies. But it
means a series of moves,\" they admit at the quaestorship. At the
beginning of July, one hundred and fifty people had to pack up and go
elsewhere. To date, around forty offices have already been delivered,
and a second delivery is expected in November. Then, we will have to
wait a year: because to limit noise pollution, the Assembly has asked
construction companies to adopt flexible working hours. Hence the slow
progress of the work. In the last month, logistical problems have also
arisen. Some, like François Cornut-Gentille, no longer received their
mail at the beginning of July. On July 12, the 1,200 computers ordered
from HP had still not been delivered and the new free software system
was \"bugging\". In short, many MPs ended up fleeing to their
constituencies. \"Reforms or not, there are limits\", sums up one MP,
who adds: \"Morale is already not at its best\...\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1374

Should patents be abolished? In the era of the Internet and the
patentability of living things, a vast intellectual movement, with
diverse origins, is calling for the legal protection of inventions to be
abolished. In his latest book, the 2001 Nobel Prize winner in economics,
Joseph Stiglitz, wrote a virulent plea against what he identifies as
\"one of the worst excesses of current capitalism\". According to him,
\"it is a question of life and death, as we see in the fight for cheap
copies of medicines. People or patents.\" Setting out on a crusade
against the \"locking up of knowledge\", he asserts, forgetting to note
that these means of transport have ultimately developed rather well,
that \"in the 19th century, patents nearly killed the airplane or the
automobile\". According to him, free access to knowledge is a \"global
public good\" and constitutes a \"moral obligation\". He goes so far as
to stigmatize Bill Gates: \"How can he defend both patents for Microsoft
and his foundation for access to health care?\" But what would this
man\'s fortune and his very commendable generosity be without his
inventions and without their legitimate protection. Another approach,
libertarian, considers, with the economist Murray Rothbard, that patents
are incompatible with the free market, because someone who is not in
possession of a patented good but who manages, by his own means and in
complete independence, to invent the same type of good, is deprived of
the use of the product of his efforts by the effect of an arbitrary
public ban. The monopoly created by the invention patent would amount in
some way to an illegitimate property right over the brains of others,
depriving of their natural rights those who discover or who, more
simply, carry out the administrative procedures, after the filing of the
patent. If Stiglitz\'s caricatured remarks find an obvious echo among
the anti-globalists and if the libertarian theory can seem
intellectually attractive, the reality principle seems, on such a
subject, to have to prevail. Indeed, from the moment that potential
imitators exist, the inventor and the industrialist who exploits the
invention cannot be encouraged to invest in research and the perpetual
improvement of products if they are not certain of being able to be true
owners of their creations. \"The inventor must be compensated and
rewarded,\" wrote John Stuart Mill. Once the novelty is accessible on
the market, it can in fact be immediately plundered by copiers who
profit from the work accomplished, without having borne the costs.
Fundamentally classic, the traditional justification for invention
patents remains always relevant. It is even more so, at a time when
copying has become increasingly easy. The occasional intervention of the
State in this matter is therefore not shocking since it only gives the
first discoverer (who will hopefully be the first to declare) the means
to prove, by the effect of a simple formalism of effectiveness, the
existence of his property right with respect to third parties. This does
not mean that the State is the creator of this right. This right
pre-exists the accomplishment of this formalism, as is the case with
material, movable and immovable property. The question of duration
should, however, be able to evolve. If, with the patent, we mean to note
and protect the existence of a property right, this should indeed be,
logically, permanent. The owner is then free to transfer his property or
grant licenses on it. However, with the current system, an invention is
only protected for a period predefined by law. This symbolic barrier has
no more meaning than justification. A family home does not fall into the
public domain after seventy years! Such a design does not deprive, quite
the contrary, inventors who wish, out of conviction or for the sake of
promotion, to make the product of their research freely accessible. We
are free to circulate, including for free, what belongs to us. The
coexistence of free software and patented software is moreover most
peaceful. Let us not force patent holders to communicate, against their
will, the fruit of their efforts to their competitors. The right of
ownership, which includes a right of exclusion, must be respected. But
when the European Commission, under the pretext of defending an
erroneous conception of competition (any inventor is necessarily in a
dominant position since he is the first - and therefore the only one -
to occupy a market that he himself created!), condemns Microsoft, in
particular because this group would create interoperability difficulties
due to the \"secret\" nature of its source codes, it violates the
fundamental right held by the Redmond firm over its own inventions. The
contemporary illusion of free and the barely veiled hatred of great
successes must not make us lose sight of these essential principles,
without which our country will have great difficulty in recovering. \*
Lecturer at Sciences Po, author of La France est foutue, J.-C. Lattès.
\"Let\'s respect the right to property. A family home does not fall into
the public domain after seventy years!\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1375

TWO YEARS to network the Regions with competitiveness clusters. These
Anglo-Saxon \"clusters\", responsible for promoting industrial
production through collaborative projects between public and private
research laboratories, were increased yesterday from 66 to 71. An
ambitious global financial industry cluster is being launched in Paris
and a cluster specializing in agri-food in Midi-Pyrénées. The other
networks labeled by the Prime Minister favor grouping: Elastopole
(rubber) brings together teams from Auvergne, Pays de la Loire,
Ile-de-France and the Center. The aeronautical activities of
Île-de-France and Paca (Astech and Pégase) are attached to Aerospace
Valley in Toulouse. And various projects are integrated into existing
clusters: tropical health research (Guyana) is backed by the Lyon
Biopôle cluster, work on free software joins Systematic Paris Region.
Public funding will not be increased, but will respect the initial
budget planned (1.5 billion for 3 years). \"The support system lasts
until 2008 (\...), it seems essential to perpetuate it after the precise
evaluation of the action of each pole\", stressed François Fillon. This
assessment stage will be carried out by the end of 2008 before renewing
in 2009 the allocations justified by \"the development of new products
and new jobs\". The very consensual interministerial committee for
regional planning and competitiveness (Ciact) took half an hour. The
poles have clearly come full circle. The Prime Minister announced the
launch of a new regional planning policy for autumn 2007.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1376

The Interministerial Committee for Territorial Planning and
Competitiveness (CIACT), established under the Prime Minister, was due
to announce on Thursday 5 July the labelling of 5 new competitiveness
clusters out of the 18 files examined. This brings the total number of
clusters to 71. These are the Finance Innovation cluster
(Ile-de-France), Agrimip Innovation (specialising in agri-food research
in Midi-Pyrénées), Elastopole (rubber industry in the Centre, Auvergne,
Ile-de-France and Pays de la Loire regions); and two clusters
specialising in aeronautics and space: Astech (Ile-de-France) and Pégase
(Provence-Alpes-Côte-d\'Azur), created \"in conjunction\" with the
Aerospace Valley cluster (Aquitaine-Midi-Pyrénées). Three other
dossiers, which did not give rise to a cluster in the strict sense, will
nevertheless be \"backed by existing clusters\", which should mean that
the companies and laboratories involved will benefit from the same
financial advantages as those of the clusters. These are the Tropical
Health dossier (Guyana) backed by Lyon Biopole; Logiciellibre
(Ile-de-France) backed by Systematic Paris Region; and Eco-efficient
Technologies in Tropical Island Environments at Risk (Guadeloupe) whose
backing by a cluster not yet decreed will be favored. These
announcements of new clusters - although their large number has been
criticized - show that the government is intensifying its policy of
competitiveness clusters whose objective is to promote innovation
through collaboration between public and private research laboratories.
Thanks to national and regional funding (the amount of 1.5 billion euros
between 2006 and 2008, initially planned, has nevertheless not been
increased), but also to tax exemptions and reductions in social security
contributions. This intensification also results in a relaxation of the
geographical criterion. By labeling a center located in several regions,
and by creating this new concept of \"backing\" which allows the
collaboration of geographically very distant laboratories. Finally, the
Ciact announced the renewal of public support from 2009 for the benefit
of centers having, after evaluation, shown \"tangible results\".

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1377

»BlackBerry or another PDA, it doesn\'t matter. There are clearly useful
features, especially for decision-makers who always need to have the
most recent information at hand. Now, the problem for me is the use of a
closed, proprietary system (and not open source). Is the service
provider a trustworthy third party? Does it archive our data without our
knowledge? Is the data backed up? And there, there is room for maneuver.
ALICE

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1378

\"Of course, I am one of the privileged few who, thanks to their
BlackBerry, can work whenever they want outside their office and be
constantly reachable. However, I quickly realized that it had become a
real obsession, and that I spent my time checking my emails. I then had
the feeling of never being able to disconnect from my job, as if I were
permanently connected to my company. In the end, what I initially
believed to be a wonderful new tool for freedom turned out to be for me
a real tool for alienation.\" GEORGES

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1379

Paris - \"Globalization is both an inevitable and necessary phenomenon.
It must not serve to aggravate inequalities between the South and the
North. Until now, the least developed countries - particularly African
ones - continue to suffer from the deterioration of the terms of trade.
Raw materials and agricultural products are paid less and less. If we
let this happen, we are heading for disaster.\" Abdou Diouf, 71, former
Prime Minister and then President of Senegal from 1971 to 2000, has been
Secretary General of the International Organization of the Francophonie
(OIF) since 2002. It is in this capacity that he received La Presse, a
few days before his speech at the opening lunch of the Montreal
Conference tomorrow, on the theme of Globalization and Economic
Solidarity. \"The OIF,\" he explains, \"obviously has the vocation to
defend French on the international stage in the face of the meteoric
rise of English. But it also has the vocation to get involved in the
world\'s major affairs.\" With a modest annual budget of 89 million
euros, the OIF certainly does not have the means to compete with the
largest international organizations. But, as Abdou Diouf says, \"it
works with multiple public and private partners, it can also advocate
for development and education, facilitate projects\...\" Particularly
with regard to black Africa, which, with more than 20 countries, forms
the largest mass of entirely and effectively French-speaking countries.
Through public interventions or more discreet work behind the scenes and
in the field, the OIF is concerned with very diverse issues: for
example, in the least developed countries, it trains civil servants in
international trade negotiations. By its composition, it constitutes one
of the voices of the poorest countries, often African, \"threatened with
being left by the wayside\" by economic development: \"Very recently,
explains Abdou Diouf, four French-speaking African countries have taken
action with the WTO to enable cotton producers to get by economically.\"
The French-speaking world is also closely interested, with multiple
private and public partners, in ways to prevent the \"digital divide\"
in Africa, which would further undermine an underdeveloped continent. It
advocates in particular for the allocation of free software. At the OIF,
the rule of law and \"good governance\" are also discussed. In short:
the institution and consolidation of democracy, most often in African
countries. The head of the OIF, who was the first to set an example in
Senegal in the 1970s and 1980s, publishes a report on the subject every
two years \"which is neither aggressive nor disrespectful, which
highlights the progress made, but also the shortcomings and the efforts
to be made\". And when there was a coup d\'état in Mauritania, the OIF
\"first condemned the coup, then encouraged and supported the return to
democracy\". Today, under a UN mandate, it is the OIF that is
responsible for rebuilding the judicial system in Haiti, which monitors
elections in Africa and provides advice. All of this therefore gives
Abdou Diouf a certain legitimacy to intervene on current international
issues. He also gives a tip of the hat to large organisations such as
the WTO, the IMF and the World Bank: \"At one time, these organisations
were marked by a certain dogmatism. Not only did they set the
objectives - sometimes laudable - but they themselves decided on the
means to be used, which caused economic and social disasters: the remedy
made the problem worse. For several years - for example, Michel
Camdessus\' term at the head of the IMF - we have understood that it was
necessary to discuss and negotiate the reforms to be carried out with
the governments concerned. With this caveat: in the commercial domain,
it is essential that the interests of the least developed countries are
truly taken into account. To avoid the worst and finally allow
take-off.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1380

The \"Paris Capitale du Libre\" event rewarded twelve projects and
actions in the field of free software. The complete list of these
\"Lutetia d\'Or\" (community, public, private, political, etc.) is on
the Ecrans.fr website.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1381

A new shareholder for Duc VOLAILLE. The Centrale coopérative agricole
bretonne (Cecab, 1.4 billion euros in turnover in 2006) has acquired a
17.38% stake in the capital of the Duc group, controlled by the
financial holding company Verneuil, for 7.6 million euros. Cecab
represents \"a choice ally and a prestigious shareholder for Duc\",
declared François Gontier, president of the Chailley (Yonne) company.
Free software is making headway IT. The players in free software and
proprietary software are burying the hatchet. While free software is
holding court in Paris until this evening, the French Association of
Traditional Software Publishers (Afdel) has agreed to take part in the
debates this year. The Afdel representative called for the two worlds to
coexist or even converge. Free software represents 1.4% of the market.
Lactalis improves its offer on Toury FOOD. Lactalis, the ousted buyer of
Toury (milk, cheese, fruit juice), has improved its takeover bid for the
Auvergne family group by 15 million euros before the Riom Court of
Appeal. On May 5, the Clermont-Ferrand commercial court ordered the sale
of the nine companies of the Toury group, in receivership, to four
companies, to the detriment of Lactalis, the world\'s second largest
dairy group.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1382

A new shareholder for Duc POULTRY. The Centrale coopérative agricole
bretonne (Cecab, 1.4 billion euros in turnover in 2006) has acquired a
17.38% stake in the capital of the Duc group, controlled by the
financial holding company Verneuil, for 7.6 million euros. Cecab
represents \"a choice ally and a prestigious shareholder for Duc\",
declared François Gontier, president of the Chailley (Yonne) company.
Free software is making headway IT. The players in free software and
proprietary software are burying the hatchet. While free software is
holding court in Paris until this evening, the French Association of
Traditional Software Publishers (Afdel) has agreed to take part in the
debates this year. The Afdel representative called for the two worlds to
coexist or even converge. Free software represents 1.4% of the market.
Sodiaal and Bongrain are marrying their cheeses FOOD. Sodiaal, owner of
Yoplait, and the cheesemaker Bongrain will create a joint subsidiary by
bringing together the brands Raclette Riches Monts, le Rustique,
Révérend for Sodiaal and Coeur de Lion for Bongrain (our editions of May
3). This division with a turnover of 500 million euros intends to weigh
in against Lactalis. This unprecedented marriage must still be
authorized by the competition authorities.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1383

The whole world has the right to have a PC supplied with Microsoft
programs, which equip more than 90% of computers in circulation. Even
small and medium-sized African companies, which cannot afford to buy a
PC or pay the licenses required to use its software. The world leader in
IT announced this at the end of the week in Ouagadougou (Burkina Faso)
during a forum on new technologies organized by Microsoft in
collaboration with the African Development Bank (AfDB) and the UN. An
announcement against a backdrop of major maneuvers by high-tech giants
in emerging countries and the rise of free software in these markets
that are not yet solvent. Donors. Unlike \"One Laptop per Child\"
(OLPC), a project at MIT in Boston initiated by researcher Nicholas
Negroponte, and Intel\'s \"Classmate\", Microsoft\'s program does not
aim to create from scratch a very cheap computer for poor countries. As
in rich countries where Microsoft has been recycling PCs for years to
give them a second life in schools in disadvantaged areas, the aim is to
allow African SMEs to benefit from a program that has the advantage of
getting users used to thinking of Windows when they turn on their
computers. Coming from donors in rich countries, mainly companies (the
United States alone retires 70 million computers each year), the PCs
will be reconditioned with Microsoft software before being resold at
very low prices. \"By 2010, a billion computers will have to be recycled
worldwide, and Africa will be able to benefit from more than half of
them,\" promised Cheikh Diarra, the head of Microsoft Africa, according
to whom there is very strong demand. According to Jean-Philippe
Courtois, president of Microsoft International, this project could cost
the American firm several tens of millions of dollars. Potential. \"We
will help transform the education system in the next fifteen years by
providing broader access to new technologies throughout Africa\" and by
promoting \"local talent,\" said Jean-Philippe Courtois. According to
him, in fifteen years of presence in Africa, Microsoft has already
trained 200,000 educators who have in turn trained 23 million students.
Set up in collaboration with UNIDO, the United Nations Industrial
Development Assistance Program, this project is just one facet of its
so-called \"unlimited potential\" program, which clearly shows
Microsoft\'s immense ambitions to equip the planet with computers. This
project aims, by 2020, to provide new technologies to the 5 billion
inhabitants of the planet who still do not have access to them.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1384

Until Sunday, the 3rd edition of \"Pocket Films\" will be held at the
Centre Pompidou in Paris, and it\'s thinking big. With 30 countries
represented, more than 200 mini fictions or documentaries, most often
one to three minutes long, shown on a big screen or on \"mobile phone
trees\", workshops, professional meetings, guest filmmakers, the program
of this free festival is enticing. \"It\'s the largest event in the
world dedicated solely to these films\... we\'ve received a thousand,
the range is very open\", says Benoît Labourdette, its coordinator.
TECHNOLOGICAL REVOLUTION \"We are at the very beginning of a great
story: that of the technological revolution brought about by this
camera, which is at the same time its own screen and broadcaster\",
believes Laurence Herszberg, director of the Forum des Images which,
closed for renovations, was unable to host the festival. After cinema,
television and the computer, the mobile phone has given birth to a 4th
screen coupled with a willingly clandestine camera, conducive to all
kinds of experiments for filmmakers, artists and citizen bloggers from
all over the world. A space for creation and democratic expression at
the antipodes of \"happy slapping\" (filmed assaults) also born with
mobile telephony. The festival provides proof of this with an
international panorama completed by a range of short films by young
French filmmakers from various schools. \"Cartes blanches\" allow you to
discover films from the The4thscreen festival in New York, created by
the artist collective \"Lili range le chat\", which builds a bridge
between Europe and Uzbekistan, or by the artist Masaki Fujihata and his
students from the Tokyo University of the Arts. THE WHOLE WORLD Africa,
often absent from film festivals, is represented by the films of Zaanga,
a cooperative audiovisual agency that advocates for the sharing of
knowledge and the dissemination of free software on the Internet. Filmed
without a budget in Togo, Niger or Burkina Faso, they show the daily
lives of human groups invisible to traditional media. Because one of the
trends of these mini films, whose aesthetic quality is increasing, is to
allow a civic, social and political expression. Filmed by German
teenagers on holiday in Lebanon last summer and already awarded, the
documentary \"Holidays\" shows their vision of war. The way in which the
mobile phone can be used for civic projects will be the subject of a
debate organized during the festival, alongside lessons in filming and
editing, and workshops, on community creation in particular.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1385

A small, innovative IT services company founded in Sherbrooke three
years ago, Révolution Linux is expanding rapidly: the company has just
obtained its ISO 9001:2000 quality certification, and its 17 employees
are now based in new premises at 2100 King Street West. Révolution Linux
offers businesses and institutions the management of simple solutions,
particularly using free software on the Internet. This software is
widely used because it is free (no licensing fees to pay, as with
Microsoft products, for example). All that remains is to adapt it to the
needs of its customers. The young company\'s customers include some
thirty school boards in Quebec and Ontario, a series of government
departments and agencies, a large international restaurant chain, and,
most recently, the City of Sherbrooke (\$50,000 per year following a
call for tenders). \"We also have a mandate with the City of Quebec for
a feasibility study on migrating from Microsoft Office to Open Office,\"
says Patrice Albaret, Director of Business Development, who adds that
the savings on licensing fees will be numerous for this large employer
with many Internet users. By eliminating Microsoft Office fees, we
immediately save \$700 per workstation\... \"It\'s a model that fits the
reality of what we want to do in Sherbrooke. It\'s an innovative company
in cutting-edge technology,\" says Denis-Robert Elias, special advisor
to Révolution Linux as president of Alliance Novare, a creation of the
Sherbrooke university hub (the two universities in collaboration with
the CHUS). Mr. Elias is also Director of the Internship and Placement
Service at the University of Sherbrooke. \"They bring new money to
Sherbrooke,\" he observes, in addition to promoting the retention of
university graduates. \"With the order book they have, I think they will
be able to increase to 25 employees within the year.\" Currently, half
of the employees were trained at the University of Sherbrooke. What are
the company\'s future plans? \"We want to continue to get closer to our
customers, have a local service, continue our expansion in Ontario and
the United States, be a leader,\" replies Benoît des Ligneris, President
and CEO of Révolution Linux. \"For our customers, we manage emails,
accounts, file sharing, antivirus, backup copy systems (in case of
failure or loss), IP telephony, and we provide technology advice,\" adds
the young CEO. albert.berube@latribune.qc.ca

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1386

Airplanes are always fascinating. What child hasn\'t had fun with a
model airplane? Some take their passion further and are even rewarded
for it. This is the case for the VAMU team at the Université de
Sherbrooke (VAMUdeS), which received the Octas Prize for University
Succession for its efforts. VAMUdeS is a team made up of about ten
undergraduate students enrolled in the Faculty of Engineering at the
Université de Sherbrooke. Last month, the team won the first UVS Canada
student competition in the design of an unmanned aircraft, often called
a drone. \"The project started three years ago,\" explains Marc-André
Lévesque, spokesperson for the group, \"and it brought together students
in mechanical engineering, electrical engineering and computer
engineering. We chose an aeronautics project because we all liked the
field, but also because we wanted to learn more.\" In the first year,
the team went to a first competition in Germany. \"We had designed a
miniature aircraft that was piloted with a remote control. We weren\'t
quite up to speed, since the other teams had planes equipped with
autopilots.\" So back to the drawing board. \"The cost of purchasing a
commercial autopilot is about \$10,000, too high for us. We then turned
to the Paparazzi group at the École nationale d\'aviation civile in
France, which makes free software available on the Internet to build an
autopilot.\" Participation in a second competition in Florida the
following year allowed them to refine the machine. The UVS Canada
competition has three stages. The first consists of submitting a
technical report that gives a precise idea of the prototype of the
unmanned aircraft that the team intends to build. It is after this stage
that the finalists are chosen who will move on to the second stage,
which is the manufacturing of the prototype. "It took a year to prepare
the technical report and another year to build the prototype." The final
stage of the competition took place in Goose Bay and involved flying the
aircraft and having it perform tasks. "The aircraft had to fly over a
4-square-kilometre forested area and participate in a search and rescue
mission. The aircraft had to be able to locate and recognise targets,
such as the crash site of an aircraft, \[determine\] if there were
survivors and where they were." The aircraft designed by VAMUdeS came in
first. The drone The miniature unmanned aircraft -- or drone -- built by
VAMUdeS is made of fibreglass. It has a wingspan of one metre, with a
slightly smaller fuselage. The aircraft is powered by two electric
motors powered by a rechargeable lithium polymer battery. The flight
time is approximately 45 minutes. The aircraft takes off in a
conventional manner, with the pilot guiding the plane using a remote
control. But once the plane is in the air, the autopilot takes over.
\"On the ground, we just sit back and watch. And as soon as the plane
disappears from our sight, we follow its flight on the computer
screen.\" The plane is also equipped with a high-precision camera that
transmits images to the computer in real time. A modem ensures the
transmission of data between the plane and the ground station. The
autopilot system is equipped with a computer and a satellite positioning
system (GPS). \"We can therefore specify points and trajectories that
the plane recognizes and we follow its movement on a satellite map.\"
The plane also has a stabilization system that allows it to maintain a
horizontal position, make a turn, climb or nose-dive. \"The
stabilization system works using infrared sensors that measure the
temperature difference between the sky and the ground, which allows the
onboard computer to know the plane\'s position in the air.\" Electrical
engineering student Marc-André Lévesque greatly enjoyed this adventure.
\"On the one hand, it\'s extremely educational. You learn almost more
than in a class. On the other hand, it\'s a multidisciplinary project.
So you have to know how to popularize your knowledge with the other
members of the team.\" \*\*\* Contributor to Le Devoir

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1387

Like prophets, supporters of \"open source\" have been announcing since
1991 the day when the Linux operating system will demote Windows on the
PC of ordinary mortals. But the hundreds of distributions delivered by
the community, often terribly complex, have never gone beyond the stage
of a sectarian movement. That was until Monday, May 28, when Dell began
selling systems running Ubuntu. Downloadable on the Internet, this
completely free operating system was born in 2004, at the initiative of
the South African billionaire Mark Shuttleworth, member of the very
select club of space tourists. After making a fortune with a computer
security company, the entrepreneur, who participates in various
educational projects in Africa, has given himself the mission of
spreading the good news of Linux throughout the world. A few million
dollars out of his wallet later, Canonical Ltd was born, with the main
mandate of developing an operating system based on the open source code
created by the Finn Linus Torvalds, with a shock philosophy to boot:
\"Linux for humans\". The concept was a hit. The operating system,
considerably lighter than Windows despite its advantageously comparable
graphical interface, its integrated suite of office software (Open
Office), its clone of Photoshop (The Gimp), language support covering 40
languages and all the necessary tools (Firefox and Thunderbird) to
browse the Web, quickly carved out a place for itself in the Linux
community. When Dell had the idea of launching the Idea Storm blog,
asking its customers to provide suggestions for improving its products,
more than 100,000 people wrote to ask for computers with Ubuntu
pre-installed. On May 1st, Dell acquiesced to their request, a move
celebrated as a profound revolution on the discussion forums devoted to
Linux. The systems finally appeared Monday on Dell.com, and are selling
for \$100 less than identical machines running Windows. But for Chris
Kenyon, director of market development at Canonical Ltd., it\'s just a
\"first step.\" \"The deal with Dell allows us to get Ubuntu a little
bit more out there,\" he says. \"Our challenge is to make people
understand that they now have a real choice when they buy a PC.\" \"And
we want to be clear: choosing Ubuntu is not choosing a low-end version
of Windows, although our system will always be completely free,\" Kenyon
says. (Secret) Offices in Montreal This free nature, a fundamental
principle of Ubuntu\'s philosophy, is ensured by customer service
contracts that Canonical Ltd. signs with its corporate clients. Enough
contracts to pay the 80 or so developers who deliver all the updates to
the London system, and to justify the opening of an office with about 15
employees in Montreal, in a tower located near the corner of Bishop and
René-Lévesque. This is where all of Canonical\'s most recent hires have
taken place, but don\'t ask the company\'s managers to give you a tour;
the location is kept secret. \"It\'s a very small office where we test,
among other things, computer equipment belonging to major suppliers.
There are open cases with the fans exposed,\" explains Jeff Bailey of
Canonical Montreal. \"You enter through the kitchen and there\'s not
even a receptionist. Our confidentiality obligations to our customers
prevent us from allowing tours of the office, but I assure you that at
all hours of the day, seven days a week, customer service employees are
answering calls from all four corners of the planet.\" Despite all the
secrecy surrounding these Montreal offices, open source aficionados
still manage to find the place. \"We\'ve had someone knock on the door
asking for technical help. They managed to track us down by following us
as we went to buy a latte,\" Baileys explains with a laugh. On the blog
of Fabian Rodriguez, a Montreal employee of Canonical, you can also read
half a dozen comments from Ubuntu users offering to serve free
croissants in the morning or sweep the floor, for the simple pleasure of
participating in the development of the operating system. An anecdote
that illustrates quite well the extent to which Ubuntu users are devoted
to the cause, almost religiously. This same community is trying to
convert thousands of Windows users to make the big jump to Linux on
blogs, websites and other forums. But Canonical\'s executives are
already thinking much further. \"We are working on developing an
ultraportable version of the operating system for future generations of
cell phones,\" Kenyon explains. To see Ubuntu in action, visit our
journalist\'s blog: http://blogues.technaute.com/peloquin

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1388

Okay. So, there\'s the desktop computer. The notebook. The ultra-mobile
computer. The handheld computer. The smartphone. And the wireless. Which
one do you use to surf the Internet? If you chose \"None of the above,\"
then maybe the Internet tablet is for you. Nokia N800 Good news! The
Internet tablet par excellence, now in its second generation, is finally
being sold in Canada by Nokia. The N800, which is the successor to the
770, has the same main features as the 770, and adds a bit more
user-friendliness. For example, two SD memory card slots (including one
that can convert an SD card into additional RAM, if needed). And a
swivel webcam that, despite its low resolution, allows you to have video
conversations over the Internet. Since the device runs on a well-known
Linux distribution, the community of cracks who adopted Nokia\'s tablet
from its beginnings have already assembled a host of free and open
source software for this device, from the instant messaging client to
the media server, including all the traditional online applications
(Web, e-mail, etc.). The media server, moreover, is surprisingly
versatile: you can access audiovisual material stored on a remote server
from the tablet, and redirect it to another device, for example another
PC, in order to play the content there. It\'s completely useless, but it
proves the capabilities of the N800. In conjunction with an application
like Orb, free on the Internet, you can access the documents stored on
your PC at home from any Wi-Fi access point. Or, failing that, from the
digital connection of a cell phone paired with the N800 via Bluetooth.
Naturally, the wireless ports will drain the device\'s battery more or
less quickly. An hour or two of use will be enough to completely empty
it. Also, for messaging fans, the lack of a keyboard will quickly become
annoying. Typing on the touch screen with the stylus is quick, but there
are limits! For those, Nokia separately details a foldable wireless
keyboard, just in case. In short, for the price and size of a high-end
portable music player, Nokia offers a device that, as a bonus, offers
the best of the Internet and mobile multimedia. And in French, to boot!
Nokia N800 www.nokia.ca \$470 \*\*\*\*1/2 + Compact and versatile, the
Nokia N800 tablet offers the best of the Internet in the back of your
pocket. - Like most devices of this type, if you\'re left-handed,
you\'re done for. HP iPAQ Travel Companion It\'s hard to say whether
this digital agenda, powered by Windows Mobile 5, is an Internet tablet,
a GPS guide for the car or, quite simply, a pocket computer. Let\'s just
say, to sum up, that it\'s a three-in-one. With the Tom Tom Navigator 6
road guidance software, pre-installed on the iPaq Travel Companion, you
also get a complete road atlas for North America. The device also comes
with a base and an articulated suction cup to attach it to the dashboard
of your vehicle. Practical for the upcoming vacations. Add to that the
Wi-Fi and Bluetooth wireless connections, and you really get a mobile
device par excellence. Too bad Windows Mobile is not yet available in
French (it will be with version 6, later this summer). HP iPAQ Travel
Companion www.hp.ca \$650 \*\*\* + The Travel Companion is more than a
digital diary: an Internet tablet, GPS guide and multimedia player all
in one. - The touch screen is unpleasant to use and is very difficult to
look at under the sun\'s rays. Pepper Pad 3 The \"open source\"
alternative to ultramobile computers and mobile devices running Windows
has a name: the Pepper Pad. It is a complete tablet, with a relatively
large and good resolution display, which includes, as a bonus, a full
keyboard separated into two sections on either side of the screen. The
latter, in addition, is touch-sensitive. Not to mention the mouse.
Pepper\'s tablet runs on a Linux distribution that already includes
several applications for getting the most out of the Internet: a
browser, instant messaging, RSS feeds, etc. And since it is a free
system, a community of developers is constantly adding new applications.
The device is also very good at multimedia: photos, videos and music
scroll across its screen without problem. You can even display a
universal remote control to control the devices in your home (an
infrared port equips the Pad). In short, a beautiful and good
entertainment. At a price that makes you hesitate, however. A lot.
Pepper Pad 3 www.pepper.com \$850 \*\*\*\* + With its integrated
keyboard, Pepper\'s tablet also rivals the famous UMPCs. - Its price is
enough to make you hesitate. Alain.mckenna@lapresse.ca

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1389

IT GROUP Dell announced on Thursday, May 24, that it wants to abandon
the exclusive sale of its computers on the Internet, a distribution
method that had nevertheless been the recipe for its success in recent
years. Starting in mid-June, two of the desktop computer models from the
Texan, the world\'s second-largest computer manufacturer, will be sold
in 3,500 Wal-Mart hypermarkets in the United States and Canada. \"In the
coming quarters, there will be new initiatives in this evolution towards
global retailing,\" explained a spokesperson for the group on Thursday.
Dell also announced on Thursday the upcoming launch of computers
equipped with the operating system based on the free software Linux.
These decisions come at a difficult time for Dell. In 2006, the
manufacturer lost its place as world number one to the American
Hewlett-Packard. For the 4th quarter of its 2006-2007 financial year
(ending at the end of January), its turnover fell by 5.2% and its profit
by 33%. And its share price has lost more than 50% of its stock market
value over the past 18 months. In recent years, Dell had bet on computer
equipment for businesses. It is now paying the price for having missed
the take-off of laptop sales to the general public, a market that
Hewlett-Packard and Asian manufacturers such as Acer have, on the
contrary, been able to seize. While direct sales on the Internet could
suit businesses, many consumers still prefer to buy laptops in stores.
In an attempt to get Dell back on track, Michael Dell, its founder, took
over the reins of the company in January, after having relinquished them
two and a half years earlier. He had suggested at that time that he was
ready to overhaul the company\'s structures and economic model. \"The
direct model was a revolution but it is not a religion,\" he wrote in an
email to his employees and revealed on the Wall Street Journal website
(Le Monde, May 3, 2007).

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1390

THE FOUNDER of the Internet encyclopedia Wikipedia was recently on the
cover of Fast Company magazine. His photo read \"Google\'s worst
nightmare\" in bold letters. Jim Wales, a young bearded forty-something,
pretends to be amused. \"My mother bought ten copies of the magazine.\"
He doesn\'t see why he would hurt Google and its 10,000 employees:
\"I\'m all alone against them.\" A former trader, Jim Wales pretends not
to follow Wall Street and emphasizes that he is not really a business
owner. \"I\'m not a businessman, but a revolutionary who wants to
destroy an entire industry,\" he jokes. \"Jimbo\" has indeed shaken up
the Internet. The collective encyclopedia he invented six years ago,
whose articles are created and modified by Internet users, is now among
the fifteen most visited sites on the planet. It now contains more than
7 million articles, co-written by 280,000 people. Last December, he
announced plans to launch a new search engine. He sees Google as
vulnerable. \"When they launched, they really stood out. The other
search engines were really bad. To the point where I doubted the future
of the Internet if you couldn\'t find anything on them.\" But he says
Google has now lost its lead. \"If you compare searches from Google,
Yahoo! and the others, the results are very similar. No one has a clear
advantage.\" A survey cited by Fast Company found that 21 percent of
business users feel the engines understand their query. Only 10 percent
find what they\'re looking for on their first search, and 93 percent
still try by changing the words. Wales says Google may not be immune to
further comparisons from consumers. \"It\'s a tough market to lock down.
Microsoft was able to get its share of the operating system market
because everyone cared about compatibility. But if your friends are
using Google and you\'re using something else, nobody has a problem with
that.\" » A successful product Wales knows that he is not the first to
venture into the field of search engines. \"We could have invested a
fortune to pay people to find a better search engine, but we would not
necessarily have succeeded.\" Hence his idea, modeled on the operation
of the encyclopedia, to involve the best in the creation of a new search
engine. \"It seems a little vague, but that\'s all I can say.\" The
Internet world is growing impatient. The forty-something spoke about his
project for the first time in December. Unlike the beginnings of
Wikipedia, he explains that this time, he is obliged to have a fairly
successful product before making it public. \"When we launched
Wikipedia, I could say we are launching an encyclopedia and only have
four articles. Now, we are expected.\" To prove that his idea is
progressing well, he highlights his hiring of Jeremie Miller, a free
software developer famous for his discoveries in instant messaging
platforms. But if he is counting on collaborations between researchers
and companies to build \"Wikia Search\", this time, the development is
being done in a commercial enterprise: Wikia, a company he set up in
2004 with venture capital (including an investment from Amazon) and
which already offers community hosting. Led by Gil Penchina, the former
European director of eBay, it now has around thirty employees. Around
fifteen programmers work in Poland. As for its economic model, \"nothing
radical\", Wikia will draw its revenue from advertising. Unlike Google
and other search engines, the algorithms for ranking sites will be
transparent. \"I believe that by giving a lot of free content you can
attract enough people to generate traffic.\" How will Wales succeed in
reconciling free community and profit? Wikia Search and Wikipedia are
officially independent projects. President of Wikia, Wales has remained
on the board of directors of the Wikipedia Foundation. The encyclopedia
is owned by Wikipedia, a nonprofit corporation, and runs on donations
and the free time of volunteers. Would a commercial project generate as
many volunteer contributions? \"That\'s why we have to be nice,\" Wales
says. \"Those who help us can leave at any time.\" New York GUILLEMETTE
FAURE

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1391

With all due respect to Mega Brands, the Lego brand recently took a
serious technological turn by launching its Mindstorms range, based on
the programmable NXT module and which allows young people who are quite
knowledgeable in the field to build a robot with rather developed
artificial intelligence. The NXT block is a small computer with a
display on which an impressive number of sensors are connected: one for
touch, one for sound, one for distance, one for light, etc. In fact,
this technology is so advanced that a community of free software
developers has recently been created to offer anyone interested free
applications that bring Mindstorms robots to life. And like most
gadgets, if it seems complicated to you, it\'s because you\'re already
too old to have fun with it. More info at mindstorms.lego.com.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1392

For years, JAMENDO LA MUSIQUE has been searching for a magic formula
that would ward off the curse that has befallen record sales since the
advent of the Internet. In four years, CD sales have dropped by almost
40%! However, piracy is not inevitable. This is the conviction of
Laurent Kratz, one of the three founders of Jamendo. This website puts
artists in direct contact with the public. The time of record companies
is over, according to the creators of Jamendo. \"The production costs of
a song have collapsed. With the Internet and effective tools, it is
possible to distribute it for free,\" assures Laurent Kratz. There would
therefore be no point in fighting against the wave of free music. \"Paid
music represents 2% on the Internet, while listening on iPods is
booming. Just like concerts,\" he emphasizes. At Jamendo, copyright is
inspired by the world of free software. The artist is forced to
subscribe to a \"Creative Commons\" license that authorizes unlimited
copying of the work on the Internet. In return, Jamendo promises to pay
a portion of its advertising revenue to the artists. Jamendo also offers
to organize the \"sponsoring\" of the artist by its fans. Internet users
can pay the musician a minimum sum of 5 euros. Jamendo receives 10% in
passing. This formula has not yet allowed the site established in
Luxembourg to achieve a significant turnover. It is not alone in this
niche. Sites like Last.fm, ArtistShare, Magnatune have already cleared
the ground. Jamendo attracts approximately 500,000 Internet users per
month and has 2,800 referenced artists. However, it is very far from
MySpace, the American giant that has become the essential site for
musicians in less than three years.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1393

For Tim O\'Reilly, who coined what is now known as Web 2.0, software is
obsolete in the new era of the Web. Data is now what matters. Since he
first talked about Web 2.0 in 1995, Tim O\'Reilly has been forced to
repeatedly explain exactly what he means by the term. Does he feel
caught up in the endless definitions? He laughs when asked.
\"Absolutely! But I have no regrets. I think there\'s still a lot of
stuff that people don\'t understand. There\'s a lot of directions that
people have taken in talking about Web 2.0 that are wrong.\" For Tim
O\'Reilly, understanding Web 2.0 means understanding that the Web is and
will be driven by data and those who own it. Before IBM introduced the
first affordable personal computer, O\'Reilly says, control rested with
those who owned the hardware. After IBM came along, software became more
valuable. Then came open-source software. \"The big question of Web 2.0
is what\'s valuable now? If you think it\'s software, you\'re missing
out,\" he says. For O\'Reilly, it\'s data that changes everything.
\"Look at Google. They have great algorithms. But if you had a copy of
Google\'s software, you couldn\'t do anything with it. It\'s Google\'s
data that\'s important.\" He points out that Google prides itself on
\"providing access to all the information in the world.\" Quite a
challenge, he says, but Google has understood that information is the
new El Dorado. \"Software can be free and open source,\" says Tim
O\'Reilly, a leading proponent of open source code. \"Because the
fundamental rules are different. I think that\'s what people don\'t
fully understand yet with Web 2.0. We\'re moving to a new platform with
new rules.\" READ THIS WEEK Life is not a video game A questionable ad
for the US Army\'s recruitment campaign uses the video game metaphor.
www.blogues.technaute.com/ebacher

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1394

Almost all government software purchases are made without calls for
tender, by mutual agreement, with suppliers of patented products such as
Microsoft, deplore specialists in free software, who are asking Quebec
to level the playing field. Cyrille Béraud, president of Savoir-Faire
Linux, a company that sells services to users of free software, notes
that purchases without calls for tender of Microsoft and other products
are the rule. \"Section 12.7 (of the Regulation respecting procurement
contracts) allows the State to negotiate by mutual agreement when it
wants to purchase software covered by exclusive rights. All purchases of
Microsoft, IBM, Novell, etc. products are made under this section. For
example, there has never been a call for tenders to evaluate an
operating system other than Windows. In our opinion, there is an abuse
of the use of section 12.7; these are millions and millions of dollars
of purchases that are made by mutual agreement.\" There are, however,
very reliable alternatives, he adds, \"but without a call for tenders,
we cannot assert them.\" He has also written to request that section
12.7 be repealed. The general director of acquisitions for the Centre
des services partagés du Québec, Guy Chouinard, acknowledges that
current conditions are not favourable to free software. \"We sign
umbrella contracts with companies to allow a ministry that needs to
change the version of its software to automatically purchase other
Microsoft, Novell or IBM products.\" Furthermore, if a ministry needs to
buy 1,000 workstations, it will prefer to keep the same supplier to
ensure that its IT equipment is consistent and stable, adds Mr.
Chouinard. \"This model slows down the implementation and development of
free software.\" \"There is almost no expertise in this area in the
government,\" he continues. The free software industry is still a small,
emerging industry that often lives on the corner of the table. We will
try to set up a global service offering to support ministries that want
to move in this direction,\" he concludes. Free software is nevertheless
very widespread in public administrations in France, points out Daniel
Pascot, professor at the Faculty of Administration Sciences at Laval
University. \"The French Ministry of Finance is completely on free
software,\" he said, \"and each member of parliament will receive a
workstation entirely on free software in June.\" Mr. Pascot has just
received Roberto Di Cosmo in Quebec, who chairs a project aimed at
promoting free software in France. The government wants to create a
competitiveness cluster to make France \"a world reference for research,
development and publishing of free software,\" indicates a press release
from the French Ministry of Economy, Finance and Industry.
passelin@lesoleil.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1395

Free software is software that can not only be obtained for free, but
can also be modified and redistributed at will. The best-known software
is Linux, an operating system equivalent to Windows, and OpenOffice, the
free counterpart to Microsoft Office. \"Since free software is free, all
the money invested in designing a system goes to local resources instead
of going to multinationals like Microsoft,\" explains Daniel Pascot, a
professor at Université Laval. \"I haven\'t used Windows XP for five
years and it works very well,\" he says. \"Across the world, public
organizations are massively turning to free software, and several
American states have policies that are very committed to this type of
software,\" emphasizes Cyrille Béraud, president of Savoir-faire Linux.
\"We are doing a contract for the Canadian Space Agency and that allowed
us to learn that the space arm\'s control console runs on Linux.\"
Pierre Asselin

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1396

What started as an informal gathering of Californian computer whizzes
two years ago has become one of the most popular ways to unveil, improve
and, why not, finance projects on the Internet. BarCamp Montreal, an
informal gathering open to anyone who cares about new technologies, also
allows you to take the pulse of Montreal\'s ICT (information and
communications technology) scene. Obviously, when it comes to a more or
less marginal event related to ICT, the connection with Silicon Valley
is quickly made. BarCamp is no exception. The event was born in 2005, in
response to an annual summit organized by the guru of what is called Web
2.0, Tim O\'Reilly. A large community of developers on the American West
Coast, who considered this gathering too elitist, organized a similar
event open to all. It quickly snowballed: there are now meetings of this
type all over the world. BarCamp In Montreal, the event is called
BarCamp. It was held for the first time last October and will be held
again on April 28, at the Société des arts technologiques (SAT), on
Saint-Laurent Boulevard. There is also a BarCamp Québec in the Old
Capital, but the date and location of the next meeting have not yet been
determined. To understand how this event works, you have to be familiar
with the culture of web 2.0, since the day is entirely dedicated to
collaboration and participation. The organization of BarCamp sums it up
this way: \"All participants must give a demonstration, a session or
help with one of them,\" we read on the website dedicated to the event.
In other words, there are no spectators at BarCamp, only speakers. There
is also no agenda. Or, to be more precise, the agenda is set by the
attendees as they invade the venue, which seems to suit everyone.
\"Arrive early to secure a slot on the presentation schedule.\" So the
conference rooms are available on a set schedule, but the content of the
presentations - and the names of the presenters - will only be known
when interested parties sign up for the schedule. Last October, the
topics varied widely, although they were closely related to the Internet
and ICT. Naturally. Networking On site, students, developers,
entrepreneurs and investors - including a number of angel investors,
more interested in emerging technologies than short-term returns - are
interested in just about everything that happens during the day. For
Austin Hill, a Montreal angel investor who closely follows the
development of emerging technologies in the city, BarCamp and DemoCamp,
two-hour express evenings using the same concept, are an inexhaustible
source of discoveries. \"In Montreal, the community of free software
developers is one of the largest,\" he says. These events are good
places to see this and to meet the people who are behind it.\" Thanks to
these meetings, Austin Hill hopes that Montreal can reappear among the
most favorable cities for starting businesses operating around the
Internet. \"There are more and more people who want to put Montreal back
on the map, as a good place to launch new businesses.\" Of course, those
who doubt it are invited to go to the SAT on April 28. A little tip:
prepare a short presentation, you don\'t want to arrive empty-handed\...
Email To contact our collaborator alain.mckenna@lapresse.ca

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1397

He is training himself in the use of free software, which he thinks will
dominate the market when it comes out. I had started to take steps to
register at Poissy, but I couldn\'t do it when the social services took
things in hand. We are following these elections with as much fervor as
the football World Cup. It is a recurring topic of conversation.
Everyone has their opinion. There are people who are scary, like Nicolas
Sarkozy. We fear his attitude towards the excluded and we are the
excluded of the excluded. We need a candidate who does not toughen the
prison regime. We are human beings, not barbarians. Anyone can end up in
prison. Even when we want to do our best, follow the rules, we can be
forced to make a gesture that changes everything. Prison conditions
should be adapted to each human being, while we are plunged into an
extremely harsh environment. If all the prisoners started voting, we
would represent something.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1398

Three weeks before the presidential election, a white paper published
yesterday (1), supported by an apolitical think tank on new
technologies, reminds us that France has no reason to crow about the
Internet. According to Renaissance numérique, which brings together the
cream of web company bosses (Mats Carduner of Google France, Christophe
Parcot of Yahoo France, Pierre Kosciusko-Morizet of PriceMinister, etc.)
and academics, France is very behind, and the \"very\" is really not too
much. The success of broadband, which our country can boast of, is like
a baobab hiding\... poverty. Because, only 44% of French households have
access to the network, when the figure reaches 70% in Germany and Great
Britain. Worse. The rate is even lower than recent entrants to the
European Union such as Latvia or Estonia. Contribution. How can a
leading economic power, ask the authors of \"2010, Internet for All\",
be in this situation? \"A double divide is being created: on the one
hand, between France and the other developed countries that have jumped
on the bandwagon of new technologies, this digital divide affecting our
national competitiveness; on the other, between those who have access to
the information society and those who are excluded from it.\" Concerned
and patriotic, the members of Renaissance numérique have therefore
decided to make their contribution in the form of fifteen measures.
Notice to presidential candidates, who deal with recurring debates in
their program (free software, the Dadvsi law or France\'s performance on
broadband), but who \"have not grasped the heart of the problem\". To
surf the Internet, you need a computer. However, France is
under-equipped compared to its European neighbors. It depends on your
point of view. But only 54.9% of French households had a PC in the
fourth quarter of 2006 (according to Médiamétrie/Gfk). To push this
figure, Renaissance numérique proposes as a flagship measure the
\"direct donation\" by companies to employees of used PCs. French
companies, which renew their fleet every two to three years, prefer the
solution of the recycling center to donation to avoid complications (use
value to be quantified, benefit in kind comparable to a company car?)
and administrative hassles. In 2006, of the 7.8 million computers
purchased, 43% were purchased by companies. If the government took
\"simple\" tax and accounting measures, 7 million computers could be
redistributed by 2010, according to Renaissance numérique. Another
measure put forward is recycling. \"One PC out of two is recyclable,\"
explains the CEO of Yahoo! France. Out of 100 computers thrown away by
individuals and the public or private sector, 50% can be reconditioned
and resold at a price of around 99 euros.\" Politics. And why not
imitate Sweden, where the rate of connected households is around 80%,
which has introduced an income tax reduction for the purchase of a
computer? Training in new technologies, strengthening the policy of
support for VSEs (very small businesses), a communication campaign to
raise awareness among non-users\... The measures listed echo provisions
already taken here and there, by the State and local authorities.
Precisely, dispersion does not facilitate efficiency. \"All the
different aspects are handled by several ministries, so it is better to
bring together all the initiatives under the same one, a ministry
delegated to the Internet\", notes Marie-Christine Levet, president of
Club Internet/T-Online France. Recalling that the Web must remain a
space of freedom. If the white paper is applied to the letter, 80% of
French households will be equipped with a computer, connected to the
Internet and trained in its use by 2010. Finally up to par\... (1)
\"2010, Internet for all, 15 measures to reduce the economic bill in
France\", online at www.renaissancenumerique.org

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1399

The Internet, and especially the tremendous surge of expression by
Internet users made possible by technological progress, is shaking up
the \"media house\". Two debates, two weeks apart. In Lille, at the
beginning of March, during the first Assises du journalisme, the
atmosphere oozed the end of the century. On the contrary, on Saturday,
in Saint-Denis, people were puffing out their chests at the Rencontres
du cinquante pouvoir, organized by Agoravox, the so-called \"citizen\"
media to which anyone can contribute. Face to face, the old world and
the new world. \"And now the innocent mouse is transformed into a lethal
weapon. With a click of a button, a profession is about to disappear.
After all, our countryside has seen the blacksmith close up shop, so why
not the journalist absorbed by the Web?\" asks Hervé Brusini, deputy
director of information at France 3 (1). Challenged by the emergence of
citizen journalism, the media began to react, by also appropriating this
new tool. In the beginning, blogs It all started with blogs. These
websites composed of news (or posts) as they came along, generally
written in the first person, gradually gained ground in the media. Cyril
Fievet and Emily Turrettini (2) date back to 1999, the first year of
blogging. It was in 2003 that journalists took hold of them in turn, at
the time of the war in Iraq, \"which was an opportunity for several
journalists to deliver their personal version of the conflict\", they
write. Some BBC \"embedded\" reporters then kept travel diaries, as a
counterpoint to the more official coverage of the war. In France,
Libération would open the ban. In December 2003, Pascal Riché and
Fabrice Rousselot, then correspondents in Washington and New York,
started a blog on \"the race for the White House\". Three years later,
most major media outlets have caught on. Journalists\' blogs, or blog
platforms open to Internet users to gain an audience. And woe betide
those who haven\'t followed suit. The latest to wake up, Le Journal du
dimanche launched its Jdd.fr site this month. Within the same
Hachette-Filipacchi Médias group, Paris Match is next on the list. The
first advantage of a blog for journalists: an unlimited space, free from
the constraints of pagination, where they can pour out information,
experiences or comments. The exercise is not without risk. The blogger
is entering an arena where all verbal blows are permitted. \"In real
life, we react in a polite manner. Conversely, on the Internet, the
first reaction is often to punch people we don\'t know in the face,\"
notes a blogger. \"But once this barrier is overcome, the exchange can
turn out to be a real pleasure.\" The blogosphere also provides a new
mine of information. Skimming blogs can help you unearth gems. As long
as you don\'t spare your effort because you often have to rummage
through hundreds of comments to find the link, the information, the
reflection worth sharing. From forum to participatory On media websites,
forums and chats are the first format where the public is given a voice.
But these debates generally take place in a marked space, where it is
still the media that decides on the theme or the guest. Recently, the
system of direct reaction to articles has appeared, at the newspaper Le
Monde, at 20 Minutes, at Libération. An additional step in trying to
take into account the spontaneous opinions of Internet users. It aims to
establish a direct relationship of exchange between the reader and the
author, or even between the Internet user and the politician. In this
spirit, giving the possibility of questioning candidates during election
periods is essential. \"Why not a referendum to determine the importance
we are prepared to give to ecological issues?\" asks Jérôme, from
Villeurbanne. He filmed himself, before posting his 1 minute 16 video
online on Dailymotion, the French video sharing site. It may be selected
by the i-Télé channel to air on the campaign news. Partners in the
operation, Dailymotion and i-Télé (3) see it as a \"very good initiative
to liven up political debate, and an excellent example of a partnership
between \"old\" and \"new\" media\". But the recipe is already
flourishing on a number of channels. The video is exploding, its
exploitation is rich in audience promises. Since July 2006, the American
CNN has also offered an online content sharing service (4) inspired by
YouTube. Internet users can express themselves through posts, reports,
images. And TF1 is already doing the same with Wat and M6 with Wideo.
The new TV The interview lasts two and a half hours. Without editing or
embellishment. It was filmed on February 12 at the opening of the Erika
trial. \"Ms. Voynet likes long durations.\" The Politic Show (5) too.
Nicolas Voisin and Julien Villacampa, 27 and 28, embarked on the
adventure with a camera down: asking each candidate for an interview.
The first, with Jean-Marie Le Pen, having lasted a long time, why not
make length a constitutive principle? \"We took the opposite approach to
traditional media which are on very short durations,\" explains Nicolas
Voisin. \"We made the choice to refuse to submit our questions
beforehand, not to cut, not to format, to give time to the
politicians.\" Only Ségolène Royal and Nicolas Sarkozy refused to play
the game. Experience has shown that politicians can be made to drift
onto subjects other than those usually addressed during the campaign
period. But what about the visibility and profitability of such
programs? Thanks to their \"first citizen political webTV\", Voisin and
Villacampa may bounce back on TV. They are talking about a project for a
show on Canal +, or even a free channel on ADSL. Conversely, television
journalists are also experimenting with new formats on the Web. A
militant fallback position for some who no longer find their place on
air. Such is John Paul Lepers who launched Latelelibre.fr, or Karl Zéro
installed on AOL. Others are trying new programs like iPol (6). This
weekly political magazine, launched in mid-January, covers blog and
Internet news, \"the stuff you don\'t see on TV\". The iPol team is made
up of journalists and audiovisual professionals (Canal +, Paris
Première, Reservoir Prod, Image and company\...). For Thomas Blard, from
LCI, the Internet can make it possible to produce programs that would be
difficult to pass on television. \"LCI has limited time and space.
Televisions must seek the lowest common denominator, he explained on
Saturday at the Agoravox Meetings. With the Internet, we can seek the
PPCM, the lowest common multiple.\" He himself hosts Décideurs.TV,
\"which allows entrepreneurs who do not necessarily have visibility in
traditional media to express themselves.\" Even the report? \"How is the
Armenian genocide treated in Turkish school textbooks?\" asks an
Internet user. And there you have it. Without further ado. Tristan
Mendès France, a freelance journalist who went to Turkey to report on
the memory of the Armenian genocide, seized on it. The next day, he went
to the University of Ankara to relay the question to a university
professor. He inaugurated the process in December 2006 in Cambodia. \"We
produce a kind of participatory documentary, a report in which Internet
users are involved in the editorial line.\" Gone are the days of the
\"one to all\" documentary, delivered to viewers who only have to watch
a finished and polished product. Its goal is to involve them and to
progress with them in the report. Next destination: Darfur, with an
invitation to follow its team of blogtrotters day by day (7). Another
bold attempt, that of the Dauphiné libéré. Stimulated by the adrenaline
of the campaign, the regional daily launched Quelcandidat.com,
\"entirely participatory media\", which allows Internet users to
\"express themselves, send their information, give their opinion
alongside articles by professional journalists and news dispatches\".
The Rhône-Alpes newspaper invented the concept of \"village reporter\",
the first \"collaborative\" blog produced from the small village of La
Murette (Isère), where a journalist works with the inhabitants to
produce an interactive two-month report. The content is written by the
journalist based on suggestions from residents and Internet users\...
But what is the point of traditional media doing citizen journalism
since there is already Agoravox and Dailymotion? Benoît Raphaël, from
Dauphiné libéré, answers on his blog: \"It is precisely used to animate,
sort, edit, and promote this new material. It is a real profession.\"
Towards \"proam\"? Where are these all-out initiatives leading? Will the
media of tomorrow be mixed, \"proam\" (for professional-amateurs)? The
first major hybrid between media and citizen emanation has been out for
less than a week. Assignement Zero (8) was launched by the American
magazine Wired in collaboration with Jay Rosen, professor of journalism
at New York University. In this open-source journalism, Internet users
contribute to articles by providing their information (crowdsourcing).
The subjects are discussed between professional journalists and
citizens, with the writing being delegated to the former. In France,
similar ideas, bringing together professional journalists and
enlightened amateurs or even experts, are being developed. This is the
case of Rue89 founded by former Libé employees. This is the case of
Owibi, an online magazine specializing in fashion and decoration. \"I
believe a lot in participatory in these areas,\" says Julien Jacob,
co-founder of Obiwi, \"we are not on topics where we spend our time
insulting each other.\" The team will be made up of journalists and a
community of experts, a thousand members at the base. \"Between the
media that have clumsily opened up to participatory and an Agoravox with
a very militant vision, there is a place between the two.\" Like an
outstretched hand between the old and the new world. photos JEAN-MICHEL
SICOT (1) Le Monde, March 5, 2007. (2) Blog Story, Eyrolles. (3)
www.dailymotion.com/group/30652 (4) www.cnn.com/exchange/ (5)
blpwebzine.blogs.com/politicshow/. A book about this adventure is coming
out on April 5: Politics on the Net, published by Max Milo. (6)
www.ipol.fr/ (7) www.blogtrotters.fr/ (8) zero.newassignment.net/

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1400

Let\'s see. Antivirus? On. Phishing filter? On. Backup? On. PC
performance optimization? All set. An all-in-one software suite that
does it all? It exists. It\'s brand new, it\'s sometimes imperfect, but
it achieves the impossible: simplifying data security on your home
computer. SYMANTEC NORTON 360 Here\'s the best-crafted security solution
to date. Symantec, one of the world\'s largest software developers, has
just launched the Norton 360 suite, which, as its name suggests with
charming poetry, covers the whole issue. For Windows XP or Vista. On the
menu, four solutions in one: protection against external threats
(viruses, zombies, etc.), automated and discreet system of backup copies
of specified files (online security account of 2 gigabytes included) and
protection against scams in general (phishing, etc.). Symantec adds to
this a simplified version of Norton\'s optimization tools, such as the
famous hard disk defragmentation, and customer service by instant
messaging, live and in French, during opening hours. We can hardly hear
the Hindi accent! It\'s an impressive list, but Symantec simplifies it
into four large icons on a yellow background, with an easy-to-understand
color code: red, yellow and green. It\'s a presentation that, according
to Symantec management, \"will be understood by everyone, including your
mother.\" And everything indicates that this is the case. To achieve
this, Symantec has sacrificed a certain transparency, which risks
annoying the most curious. Even the phishing filter isn\'t too
forthcoming when it comes to explaining its behavior. Note in passing
that it is guaranteed to be compatible with Microsoft\'s Internet
Explorer, as well as Firefox, the open-source Web browser from the
Mozilla Foundation. Symantec Norton 360 \$90 (\$70 per year thereafter);
www.symantec.ca \*\*\*\*1/2 (+): All the protection tools are included
in an effective, no-hassle formula. (-): Parental control tools probably
would have been a good fit in a suite at this price. MICROSOFT WINDOWS
LIVE ONECARE If you\'ve been following along, you\'ll have gathered that
Microsoft launched Windows Vista, Office 2007, and now it\'s offering
Windows Live OneCare, an all-in-one suite that can be downloaded from
the Windows Live portal as a trial version, for three months, or in
full, for \$60 per year. OneCare offers the same services as Norton 360
for Vista, except that its presentation is much more polished. Its
operation is just as simple: information bubbles appear each time the
software makes a decision regarding the security of operations in
progress on the computer. There is no doubt that Microsoft developers
have mastered the graphic aspect. The mechanics, however, leave room for
improvement. Independent analyses rank Microsoft\'s protection tools,
including OneCare\'s antivirus and phishing filter, dead last out of 15
comparable software. Norton 360 ranks fifth. Finally, the backup service
integrated into OneCare does not include a free online storage space,
unlike its Symantec counterpart. Microsoft promises to fix all these
problems by the end of the summer. In the meantime, since it is an
all-in-one suite that is free for three months, we would be crazy to do
without it. Microsoft Windows Live OneCare \$60 per year (first three
months free); http://onecare.live.com \*\*\*1/2 (+): The presentation is
very neat. Its ease of use is heartbreaking and the first three months
are free. (-): The impermeability of the protection tools leaves
something to be desired. MCAFEE TOTAL PROTECTION Everyone has definitely
spread the word. Even McAfee offers an all-in-one suite called McAfee
Total Protection. It includes no fewer than 10 tools to protect and
optimize the performance of your computer. Some are exclusive to McAfee:
utilities that speed up file and printer sharing, you won\'t find them
in Norton 360 or OneCare. The main window is not as polished as its
rivals. This tool gives the user a little more leeway in configuring its
various functions. For people who want to avoid having to get their
hands dirty, you\'ll have to come back. In terms of protection against
external threats and other malware, McAfee ranks lower than Symantec,
but still better than Microsoft. McAfee Total Protection \$100;
www.mcafee.com \*\*\*\*1/2 (+): This suite supports functions not
covered by its rivals. (-): It is a little less simple to operate than
the other two. Horror movie? After viruses, worms and Trojan horses,
here is the new threat against PCs connected to the Internet that turns
them into real \"zombies.\" This is the official term to describe the
11% of computers in North America infected by malicious code that
hackers can control remotely. alain.mckennalapresse.ca

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1401

1\. Expansion of the Exhibition Centre The Québec City Tourism Office is
proposing to increase the exhibition area of the Québec City Exhibition
Centre from 125,000 to 200,000 square feet. Its president, Pierre
Labrie, describes the project, estimated at \$24 million, as
\"realistic, profitable and urgent.\" The investment could make it
possible to hold two medium-sized trade shows at the same time or to
host larger events. According to the Office, the City of Québec (which
has already included this project in its capital program), the
Government of Québec and the Government of Canada could contribute to
its realization. 2. Beautification of Route 138 on the Côte-de-Beaupré
The MRC of La Côte-de-Beaupré is proposing to gradually beautify and
redevelop Route 138, between downtown Québec City, the Côte-de-Beaupré
and Charlevoix. The idea is to offer new signage that would highlight
major tourist attractions such as Mont-Sainte-Anne, the
Sainte-Anne-de-Beaupré Basilica and the Massif de
Petite-Rivière-Saint-François, to do some landscaping and to bury the
wires. The developer believes that international tourism will increase
in this area and that this is a great opportunity to make the eastern
gateway to Quebec City \"an entrance worthy of the international
reputation of the regions concerned\". Several partners such as
governments, CLDs and business people have been identified but the costs
of the project have not been estimated. 3. Guided tours of the Quebec
Bridge infrastructure Two Quebec City entrepreneurs, Sylvain Gagné and
Ghislain Lévesques, from the Grimpont organization, want to organize
guided tours of the Quebec Bridge infrastructure. They would like to
introduce the engineering aspects of the bridge and its history. Their
goal is to develop a new high-level tourist attraction product in the
west end of the city. The partners identified include the Parc Aquarium
de Québec. 4. Establishment of the St. Lawrence Seaway The Route Bleue
Québec, an organization chaired by André Lévesque, wants to establish a
safe navigable sea kayaking trail along the St. Lawrence by June 2008.
The goal is obviously to develop ecotourism in the region. According to
the promoters\' plans, the project would include launching sites, safe
shelters, as well as rest and lodging areas. 6. The Momentum Technology
Centre Alain Gariépy and Steeve Lapointe want to launch a service
company in the fields of video, television, film and music. According to
them, Québec must be able to count on world-class production
infrastructure to \"recover the audiovisual production that is slipping
away from us for the unilateral benefit of the Montreal region.\" To
carry out their projects, the promoters hope to obtain financial support
from a number of partners, including private investors, the Fonds
d\'investissement de la culture et des communications and FondAction
CSN. 7. Leonardo da Vinci alchemist PE Poitras, a company that
specializes in event production, including exhibition services, is
working on preparing Leonardo da Vinci alchemist, a technological and
\"multimedia\" exhibition. The promoter would like to create a
reconstruction of Leonardo da Vinci\'s laboratory workshop and thus
allow visitors \"to be projected into the imagination, into the brain of
the great Italian master.\" Among the partners considered, the company
identifies the Italian honorary consul as well as partners with ties to
Italy. 8. Quebec, cruise port The Quebec City Tourism Office supports
the development of Quebec City as a place of embarkation and
disembarkation for international cruises. Its objective is to increase
the economic benefits, in particular by extending, for example, the
length of stay. The Office also intends to develop a partnership with a
cruise line in order to exploit new products. 9. Le Diamant, a venue for
artistic presentations Ex Machina, Robert Lepage\'s company, wants to
transform the highway tunnel located under Honoré-Mercier Avenue into
two performance halls that will be used to present theatrical
productions. Among the objectives put forward by the promoter, there is
that of consolidating and developing the activities of three cultural
organizations and of \"recouping the significant investment made 30
years ago for the construction of a tunnel that has not been used
since.\" The Centre de diffusion pour l\'enfance et la jeunesse les Gros
Becs, the Carrefour international de Théâtre de Québec and the City of
Québec are Ex Machina\'s partners. 10. Certification: Savoir-faire île
d\'Orléans The Union des producteurs agricoles, the CLD and the Chambre
de commerce de l\'île d\'Orléans want to establish a certification mark
that would be called \"Savoir-faire île d\'Orléans\". This certification
would be awarded to agricultural and agri-food products, as well as to
service companies that meet specific criteria. This exclusive brand,
they believe, is a way to guarantee the identity of products and
services from the island. According to the promoter, the Bureau de
normalisation du Québec should be able to offer its expertise in order
to develop the specifications that producers must comply with. It will
be the certifying body. 11. Life Sciences Business Incubator In
partnership with the CHUL Research Centre, the Centre québécois
d\'innovation en biotechnologie wants to launch a business incubator
specializing in life sciences. This incubator would facilitate the
start-up of companies specializing in this field by reducing risks and
costs. The Centre québécois d\'innovation en biotechnologie claims to
have the necessary infrastructure (equipment) and rental spaces capable
of accommodating start-up companies. 12. Québec, a wireless city ZAP
Québec, a non-profit organization, was created in November 2006 to make
the national capital a wireless city. The organization wants to create
public Internet access zones that would allow people to connect from
anywhere. Tourists, students, business people and, of course, the
general public would benefit from such a service and, according to the
promoter, could \"participate more actively in the dynamism of their
community.\" Approaches to the relevant government authorities have been
undertaken, but \"instead of waiting for the implementation of a
centralized and very costly municipal infrastructure, ZAP Québec uses
existing Internet connections, those of hundreds of corporate and
institutional citizens.\" 13. Charlevoix, a learning region Promoters
would like to implement a learning region concept in Charlevoix. This
territory would thus maintain privileged links between the education
system, the research system and the entrepreneurial system. Formation
continue Charlevoix is leading this project. One of its objectives is to
create interactions between stakeholders in order to promote the
transfer of research and learning to business start-ups. Various
educational institutions, including the Centre d\'études collégiales de
Charlevoix, the local school board and the Université du Québec à
Chicoutimi, are identified among the partners considered, as are the ATR
Charlevoix and Groupe le Massif. 14. Centre dedicated to free software
Savoir-faire Linux wants to bring together, in the form of a kit,
resources (in free software) that are directly accessible and shareable.
This kit would provide businesses with the means to benefit from the
advantages and contributions of this free software and thus improve
their competitiveness. Businesses could also pool their efforts to make
better use of this software, to the extent possible, of course.
Savoir-faire is a company that offers support for the use of Linux, an
operating system (a bit like Windows) that has the particularity of
being free. 15. National School of Interactive Entertainment Companies
specializing in video game design, in collaboration with Pôle
Québec\--Chaudière-Appalaches, want to set up a National School of
Interactive Entertainment. This school \"would be a unique place
offering access to programs and initiatives provided by existing
educational and training institutions.\" Behind this school, there is
the objective of ensuring the growth of this sector by ensuring that the
current pool of expertise is increased. 16. Indoor soccer stadium The
Notre-Dame-de-Foy Campus is considering building an indoor soccer
stadium that would include five playing areas. According to the Campus
management, this project would allow for a rapid improvement of
collective infrastructure. This stadium \"meets the needs expressed by
users and supports the growth of commercial and tourist activities.\"
The municipality of Saint-Augustin-de-Desmaures, the Commission scolaire
des Découvreurs and the Association régionale de soccer de Québec are
contributing to the advancement of this project. 17. Geospatial
Excellence Centre Pôle Québec\--Chaudière-Appalaches wants to make the
national capital a centre of excellence in geospatial technology and, to
achieve this, it is considering setting up a geospatial technology
institute. The institute would have the mandate to refine the brand
\"Québec, centre of excellence in geospatial technology\" in global
business and innovation networks, which should help increase revenues,
exports, investments and, of course, jobs in this field. The first steps
taken by Pôle Québec\--Chaudière-Appalaches have shown interest in the
project from companies in this sector. 18. Innovation City Université
Laval would like to develop the space located between the CHUL, the
Laval hospital and the university campus to encourage business creation,
along the Robert-Bourassa highway. In this way, the university believes
it can diversify its support activities for teaching and research
programs and encourage new partnerships between Laval, public
organizations and the private sector. 19. World-class optics and
photonics A committee bringing together Pôle
Québec\--Chaudière-Appalaches, businesses and research centres wants to
develop an optics and photonics development centre, which would support
the region\'s position in this field on an international scale. Behind
the approach, there is, of course, the objective of supporting the
creation of new businesses and encouraging companies from outside to
come and set up in Québec City. Pôle believes that, by putting this
structure in place, the turnover of companies in the region in this
sector would increase from approximately \$200 million to half a billion
dollars. 20. Technology integration centre The Technopôle Défense et
Sécurité is considering creating a Technology Integration Centre that
would establish a defence and security district. This district will
allow the pooling of research infrastructures to accelerate product
development. In addition, a marketing office would allow development
opportunities to be qualified and new markets to be targeted. In five
years, the promoter of the center expects to increase the number of jobs
related to defense and security by 10% (from 6,000 to 6,600).

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1402

Online recruiting sites have been around for 10 years now, but their
formula hasn\'t really changed. For companies looking for candidates who
stand out from the crowd, the solution sometimes lies off the beaten
path. With all the possibilities of the Internet, these are not the
original ways of announcing that you are looking for talented workers.
\"With new media, like blogs and online video, you can find new ways to
recruit online for a tenth of the price charged by some specialized
sites,\" says Austin Hill, co-founder of Zero Knowledge, a Montreal
start-up that he later sold to become an angel investor. \"To attract
original and talented employees, you also have to prove to them that
your company is at least as original and talented as they are,\" he
adds. There\'s no doubt that Mr. Hill knows his stuff. The number of
honours he has received over the past few years - ranging from the title
of Emerging Entrepreneur of the Year in Quebec in 2000, awarded by Ernst
& Young, to the title of ICT Pioneer by the World Economic Forum in
2001 - is evidence of this. But the fact remains that the Alberta native
is himself looking for talented and gifted people in ICT, for a new Web
community project considered promising, called the Ojibwe Project.
Originality on the cheap \"For a relatively secret project like this,
recruitment sites are not very effective,\" he says. \"To introduce
yourself, you have to conform to a standardized formula that is the same
as the one that newspapers used 100 years ago. And then you get a ton of
resumes from overqualified people, whose personality and talent you
don\'t get.\" For the Ojibwe project, Austin Hill and his partner, Alex
Eberts, decided to rely on YouTube, LinkedIn and a \"vlog\" (video blog)
that they launched two weeks ago. On this site, a short video clip mocks
recruitment sites, while describing the type of jobs they have to offer
(for the record, they are looking for two Python and Java programmers).
To apply, the rule imposed by the two adopted Montrealers is this: no
resumes. We want to see your personality. \"In less than 48 hours, we
had 2,400 visits and we received job applications that we would never
have had otherwise,\" summarizes Mr. Hill. Applications coming from as
far away as the United Kingdom! Taking inspiration from Silicon Valley
In Canada, \"start-ups\" have a lot of difficulty recruiting. However,
they generally offer jobs that are highly sought after by skilled
workers. They see these emerging companies as a golden opportunity to
participate in the birth of a new project, or to fully leverage their
talent or expertise. Basically, in a career, it has the effect of a
turbocharger. Montreal tech companies are no exception to this
phenomenon. However, there is no shortage of skilled workers in the
Quebec metropolis. \"Especially in the development of free software,
Montreal has an impressive bank of talented programmers,\" believes the
former president of Zero Knowledge. Except that with the traditional
communication channels that exist in Montreal, it is very difficult for
candidates and companies to stand out. More and more observers are
noticing this, the best description of this situation coming from Ben
Yoskovitz, a Montreal ICT consultant who recently listed, on his blog,
Instigator Blog, the \"nine signs that the online job market is broken
(sic)\". Yoskovitz has no solution to offer. Instead, he throws the ball
back to Hill, who thinks that entrepreneurs should take more inspiration
from Silicon Valley. There, he says, start-ups are a more than common
phenomenon.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1403

Office work has never been more efficient. Office suites, whether
purchased at a high price at the corner store or downloaded for free
from the Internet, have never been more versatile. From letters of
recommendation to timesheets, it has never been easier to create and
share digital documents. Microsoft Office 2007 When you think about it,
it\'s been a big year for Microsoft. In addition to Windows Vista, the
Redmond multinational has revamped its Office suite from start to finish
in order to simplify its use. The result is so convincing that one
wonders why the media is talking so much about Vista\'s flaws, and so
little about the qualities of Office 2007. Because the new Office
includes very, very versatile office tools, a more intuitive graphic
presentation and a host of small improvements here and there. Without
really adding new functions to its basic applications (Word, Excel and
PowerPoint), Microsoft is making the functions already present in its
software easier to find, to the point where we wonder why we didn\'t use
them before. To achieve this, we use a toolbar that is more visual and
better structured than traditional drop-down menus. Microsoft calls this
bar the \"ribbon\". It groups functions by theme (Drawings, tables,
formatting, etc.) and, this is the charm of this new feature, it adjusts
itself according to the size of the window in order to offer the best
compromise between the available space and the number of functions
displayed. In the same vein, Microsoft has pushed a little further the
use of its display that was formerly called \"wysiwyg\" (for \"What you
see is what you get\", which the OQLF translates as \"tel-tel\"), and
which allows you to instantly see on the screen the effect that changing
the font, document style, and so on will have. As soon as the cursor
hovers over an item in the list of style choices, for example, the
entire document is immediately reformatted from that style, before our
eyes. Cool. Microsoft Office 2007 \$180 (Home & Student), \$500
(Standard); www.microsoft.ca 4.5/5 \* With the layout of the icons in
the \"ribbon\" of Office 2007, it is easier to improve the presentation
or functions of your documents. - The new save format is not compatible
with older versions of Office. Google Apps For those who are not annoyed
by working from a Web browser, Google has cobbled together a completely
free online solution that includes a spreadsheet, a word processor, a
personal calendar and a document sharing platform. The whole thing has
been dubbed Google Apps, a name that may change when Microsoft\'s
self-proclaimed new rival unveils the final version of its office suite.
For now, it\'s still in beta, but judging by the ease of use of the
Spreadsheet and \"Document\", the word processor, we can\'t wait to see
it when it\'s fully functional. In both cases, you can import and export
documents created in rival applications (including Word and Excel files,
of course), which you can modify at will and then save on your personal
computer\'s desktop or in the virtual folder that anyone registered with
Google has (which gives you a Gmail address as a bonus). You can then
share the documents contained in this folder by inviting other members
to access the desired files. Handy for creating an efficient and mobile
workflow, or for having a database accessible from any Web access point.
Google Apps Free; docs.google.com 3/5 + The strength of Google tools is
that they can be easily shared and modified from anywhere in the
world. - Google\'s suite of Web applications is still in an incomplete
beta version. OpenOffice 2.1.0 As its name suggests, OpenOffice is a
free office suite offered free of charge on the Internet. It includes
just about every application you could hope for in a professional suite,
it is compatible with Microsoft file formats and it can be installed on
a PC running Windows, Mac OS or Linux. For anyone who does not want to
shell out the few hundred dollars required to obtain a legitimate copy
of Microsoft Office, it is the ideal alternative. As a bonus, its
graphic presentation is strangely similar to that of an old version of
the Microsoft suite. In other words, it is easy to find your way around.
Like other free software, the success of OpenOffice is based on a
community of developers who are committed to improving the product. As a
result, an impressive number of document templates are included, or can
be downloaded as needed, from the son\'s class presentation to the
spreadsheet for family expenses. OpenOffice 2.1.0 Free;
fr.openoffice.org 4/5 + The OpenOffice suite is the ideal tool for
working at home: homework, budget calculations, etc. And it costs
nothing! - The omnipresence of applications like Microsoft Outlook in
the workplace makes OpenOffice less attractive for the office.
alain.mckenna@lapresse.ca

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1404

Techno Centre logiciellibres (TC2L) did not exist in 2005. Today, the
Quebec SME has 94 employees, a third of whom come from abroad. It has
opened offices in Montreal and Ottawa. But to whom or what can we
attribute such success? To the rise of free software, answers without
hesitation the president of Techno Centre, Roger Laberge. He himself has
been a fierce supporter of free software for years. He has made it the
raison d\'être of his company. Among the known free software products,
we find Linux, Mozilla, Openoffice.org, which counterbalance the paid
products offered on the market. However, if the client no longer has to
pay royalties to multinationals for the ownership of software, he must
pay for free software services. However, TC2L lives, grows and employs
about a hundred people thanks to the training, consultation, development
and support services that it provides to ministries, municipalities and
companies that have adopted the free software solution. \"Our goal is to
free our customers from the shackles of proprietary software, to make
them switch to free software by replacing paid operating systems,\"
continues Mr. Laberge. In Quebec, TC2L stands out for its TYPO3
programming of websites. It\'s their trademark. In fact, the University
of Sherbrooke has just chosen TYPO3 as a web management tool for the
redesign of its 250 sites. \"Personally,\" says Mr. Laberge, \"I was in
favor of free software well before it became popular with governments,
ministries, and institutions. I found that the business model of
proprietary software was flawed. In fact, multinationals sell you a user
license for a recipe that is valid in a single kitchen and for your food
only. Furthermore, any modification of this recipe is strictly
prohibited,\" he explains. \"The philosophy of free software is the
opposite. It gives you the freedom to use the software for any purpose,
to study how it works, to adapt it to your needs, to redistribute copies
and even improve the program so that everyone can benefit from it. It\'s
a global sharing community,\" continues Mr. Laberge. \"And that\'s what
I like.\" About 30% immigrants But for now, Roger Laberge is facing a
shortage of qualified workers. \"The reality,\" he says, \"is that in
Quebec we lack computer scientists.\" He himself has had to step up his
efforts to find TYPO3 programmers. And to meet his workforce needs, he
has turned to immigration. About 30% of his workers come from abroad.
\"Many are French,\" he says, \"because they are recognized as TYPO3
specialists.\" For now, Roger Laberge refuses to move part of his
activities to Asia or elsewhere. \"On the contrary,\" he says, \"my goal
is to attract programmers from India to Quebec. They have good talent
there. It\'s up to us to go and get them.\" The businessman also hopes
that CEGEPs and universities will do more to promote computer science
programs to young people. There are very interesting careers in this
sector of activity that are not known,\" he says. Meteoric rise For
three years, \"free\" has experienced a meteoric rise. The public sector
has adopted it. \"Free software meets the needs of ministries and
organizations while being very secure,\" Roger Laberge points out. Who
would have thought, for example, that the Ministry of Culture and
Communications of Quebec would one day have a free software website? But
since 2006, it has been done. And other organizations have followed. One
of the effects of the free software revolution is to have rebalanced the
market that was until then dominated by multinationals. For Roger
Laberge, open source is a must. As proof: the constant growth of TC2L
over the past 20 months. But the CEO does not hide the fact that he has
a creative business approach. Despite everything, Mr. Laberge admits
that when he created his company, he did not think that it would go so
fast and so far. lfournier@lesoleil.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1405

Eric Schmidt, Larry Page and Sergey Brin are at the helm of the hottest
company right now, but their salaries would be the envy of many. For the
third year in a row, they will be paid \$1 a year\... at least
officially. That\'s according to a legal document filed yesterday by
Google. Google CEO Eric Schmidt and the company\'s two co-founders had
reduced their salaries to \$1 a year in 2004, just before the company
went public. It\'s a safe bet that the three Google executives won\'t be
living in poverty, since they own multiple shares of the company.
According to documents filed last year, Larry Page, who will soon be 34,
owns 32.1 million shares of Google, worth about \$14.2 billion. His
colleague Sergey Brin, 33, owns 31.6 million shares, worth \$13.9
billion. Eric Schmidt is no exception. His 12.5 million shares are worth
about \$5.5 billion. In the past year, Google\'s three CEOs have sold
some of their shares. But, according to the company, they didn\'t get
any bonuses. They\'re not the only executives who take \$1 a year.
Apple\'s Steve Jobs and Yahoo\'s Terry Semel earn the same amount.
FRANCE WANTS TO STOP HAPPY SLAPPING Under a new law that goes into
effect today, happy slapping, which involves filming an act of violence
with a cell phone and posting it on the Internet, is becoming illegal.
The practice began in England and quickly spread among young people.
Despite its name, the acts are often violent and committed against
randomly selected victims. They are then posted on online video sites
such as YouTube. French people who engage in this activity could now be
sentenced to up to five years in prison. The new law makes it illegal to
film acts of violence, unless you are a professional journalist. The
Crime Prevention Act states that it \"shall not apply when the recording
or broadcasting results from the normal exercise of a profession whose
purpose is to inform the public or is carried out in order to serve as
evidence in court.\" Some freedom of expression advocates have spoken
out against the new law, saying it would discourage ordinary citizens
from filming cases of police brutality. In a statement, Reporters
Without Borders points out that Internet users are now actively involved
in creating and disseminating information. \"Reporters Without Borders
considers that it would be shocking if this type of activity, which
constitutes an important safeguard against possible abuses of power,
were criminalized in a democratic country,\" the organization wrote.
Marie-Ève Morasse READ THIS WEEK: Freesoftware does not mean freeware
Many people seem to confuse freeware, opensource and freesoftware.
Nelson Dumais sheds light on this issue. www.technaute.com/nelsondumais

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1406

After Google, it is the turn of MySpace, Second Life and many others to
invade Europe. The most profitable services of Web 2.0 are invested,
without real competition, by groups, most often North American. And it
is not being anti-American to say so. Although the network is reputed to
be homogeneous and distributed, the phenomenon is centralized to the
extreme; all the data ends up in machines located in Palo Alto or
elsewhere. This technical centralization goes hand in hand with the
financial concentration specific to information capitalism, which
considers common knowledge as sources of profit. Today, even Yahoo is
struggling against Google and its 155 billion dollars of market
capitalization. This is to say that, in this global Monopoly, the
European Internet economy has already lost. We will be digested, unless
we decide to abruptly change the rules of the game, technical, legal and
political. Moving to an \"acentric\" Internet: many centralized services
can also be carried out in an acentric mode, without the intervention of
any server, and therefore any operator. Examples? Maay (2), a P2P search
engine developed by researchers at France Télécom, carries out searches,
admittedly less massive than Google, but more \"social\", all without
any center. VReng (3), designed by researchers at ENST, works like
Second Life, but without any server. IPv6, the future Internet standard,
kept under wraps for years by telecommunications operators, could
achieve to the power of ten what P2P prefigured, that is to say,
symmetrical exchange between all Internet users, without depending on
third parties. The international foundation for the P2P alternative (4)
and the French initiative IPv6PourTous (5) have shown it: operators only
have to press a button to make this possible. Enough to send the
monopolistic failings of Web 2.0 to the souvenir shelf. Funding the
authors of free software. What proprietary software does, free software
does even better. According to some candidates for the Elysée, the State
would massively convert to it. But what about funding them? By
supporting research and free software service companies? Without a
doubt. But we must not forget other essential players. The most creative
free software is often the work of developers from all backgrounds,
working, not according to the competitiveness criteria required by
innovation agencies, but in a spirit of cooperation. The uses they
pioneer indicate the way forward. In France, Parliament has virtually
declared P2P software authors outlaws. Across the Atlantic,
industrialists draw inspiration from their ideas and aspire to the most
brilliant individuals. To get out of this depressive spiral, we must
support, independently of monopolies, services and research. Free
authors must also be adequately financed, for example in the mode of
self-determination of projects and credits by the authors themselves.
Develop common goods. The State\'s intangible assets would be much
better valued if they were given the status of freely exploitable common
goods (6). A simple calculation: the IGN (National Geographic Institute)
is 50% financed by the State and finds the rest of its resources by
selling its maps. To whom? Mainly to local authorities. In short, the
IGN is 100% financed by public funds. Therefore, not only are its
marketing costs totally unproductive, but the fact that its data is
proprietary means that their valorization, outside of public circuits,
is almost impossible. This results in a deficit of economic activities
and therefore of jobs. This is true for the IGN and also for public
bodies dealing with statistical, heritage, urban, tourist data, etc. And
how many patents from public and even private research, awaiting
improbable industrial projects, could be thus valorized? At the opposite
end of the spectrum, the authors of the Lévy-Jouyet report (7),
commissioned by Thierry Breton, propose that the State engage in a
frenzied trade in its intangible assets. It is a waste of time, faced
with information capitalism, it is futile to protect oneself behind
Maginot lines. The public service would definitively lose its soul. It
costs more to sell than to give. So, let us give away our common goods,
on condition that we avoid their subsequent prevarication. An acentric
network, fueled by free software, could contribute to this. Change
perspective. The incredible capital concentration that is taking place
before our eyes is siphoning off the global economy and perverting the
spirit of the Internet. We must return to fundamentals. What political
project can we formulate for the network of networks? Where do we want
it to go? In my opinion, nothing less than towards a major invention,
similar to the \"spatial perspective\", which marked the transition from
the hierarchical world of the Middle Ages to the geometrized world of
the Renaissance. We must leave the era of the \"temporal perspective\"
born with the telegraph, whose last vanishing points are television
transmitters and websites as we know them. It is a question of entering
the time of the \"digital perspective\" (8), whose universally shared
\"vanishing codes\" will allow human communities to form and exchange as
they wish. If the Republic still has any meaning, it must do everything
to ensure that what now constitutes the invisible heart of human
exchanges is not an end, but a means. In this way, the network will be
able to contribute to responding to major global challenges, and to
inventing new ways of living together. (1)
http://overcrowded.anoptique.org/ (2) http://maay.netofpeers.net (3)
http://vreng.enst.fr/ (4) http://p2pfoundation.net/ (5)
http://ipv6pourtous.free.fr (6) http://paigrain.debatpublic.net/?
page_id = 57 (7) http://rubyurl.com/EjB (Lévy-Jouyet report) (8)
http://perspective-numerique.net

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1407

At 10 Downing Street, petitions are now posted online. Seduced by the
sirens of participatory democracy, Tony Blair opened a virtual mailbox
in November to submit grievances of all kinds. All demands are accepted
except for party matters, requests about ongoing judicial inquiries,
mentions of MPs or ministers by name, defamatory remarks or humorous
requests. In the meantime, petitions are flourishing by the thousands
(1). Among the most popular: the disappearance of inheritance tax, the
abandonment of the national identity card project or the cancellation of
the plan that provides for a tax for drivers based on the kilometers
traveled. This petition has rallied nearly 1.8 million disgruntled
people. A record that has made the pillars of power tremble. \"The
person who set up this e-petition system is an idiot,\" Douglas
Alexander, the Secretary of State for Transport, who initiated the
project, is said to have criticized. \"Before the site was open, we
would have had to organise a campaign group and employ activists to get
the petition signed on the streets,\" says Peter Roberts, the
petition\'s author. \"I just had to post emails with a link to the
government website. The new system allows us to act more cheaply and
more quickly.\" London from our correspondent Within the government,
enthusiasm is more lukewarm. Of course, this system allows Blair to
collect valuable data on his fellow citizens, but through this service,
he risks being caught red-handed on a deaf ear. To avoid any symptoms of
this kind, some are already dreaming of a threshold of signatures from
which a petition would be placed directly on the parliamentary agenda. A
dream shared on the other side of the Channel. In her presidential pact,
Ségolène Royal promises that any petition gathering at least a million
signatories will become a bill that can be examined by Parliament.
Nothing could be easier, according to Tom Steinberg, founder of
mySociety, which manages the site: \"The system we use is free software.
The aim is that governments of all countries can use it and make it
their own.\" (1) http://petitions.pm.gov.uk

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1408

SMILE, you are being watched! We can\'t imagine the amount of personal
information that can be retrieved on the Web by people with varying
degrees of good intentions. \"On the Internet, there is no longer really
a private or professional sphere,\" emphasizes the CNIL (National
Commission for Information Technology and Civil Liberties) website.
\"You only have to type your name into a search engine to realize all
the traces you have left, in spite of yourself, in cyberspace. A signed
petition or registration with an association can be seen by everyone
without you knowing it.\" Moreover, sometimes we quite knowingly entrust
the Web with information that we would not give to our neighbor.
Articles and comments published on a blog, images posted on a
photo-sharing site or contributions left on a forum provide information
about our lives, our tastes or our entourage. As Damien Bancal, creator
of the security site Zataz.com, notes, \"people often pay less attention
to what they write on the Internet than to what happens in their real
lives. They feel like they are protected. However, danger can be
everywhere, we don\'t know who the person in front of us really is.\"
And he insists: \"It\'s incredible the number of people who share very
personal information on their blog, like photos of their children.
We\'ve already seen such images hijacked by pedophile sites\...\"
hackers and vigilantes We can also be tracked on the Web, and against
our will. As Damien Bancal notes, \"some kids, using a few very simple
lines of code, have fun tracking a computer and its wanderings on the
Internet.\" These methods are also those of hackers and cybercriminals.
For them, \"tracking\" an Internet user generally comes down to
distributing stealth programs that open a door on their computer through
which the hacker will \"enter\", without the knowledge of the owner of
the machine. The goal? To recover confidential information such as the
username and password used to connect to a bank account consultation
service. And then, to quietly empty the account in question\... Surfing
the Internet without leaving a trace is almost impossible. Firstly
because Internet service providers are required to keep information on
the IP addresses of the sites visited for a month, in accordance with
the Digital Economy Act (LEN). Don\'t imagine evading this surveillance
by going to an Internet cafe. As in any public place allowing Internet
consultation (library, community center, ANPE, etc.), connections are
archived. Tracking Internet users sometimes serves commercial interests.
Thus, some record companies and copyright management companies track
those who illegally download and distribute protected works on
peer-to-peer (P2P) networks. With means that are not always very legal,
as Loïc Dachary, president of the FreeSoftwareFoundation France, points
out: \"These companies or organizations distribute files on P2P networks
to locate the IP addresses of those who download. They replace the
police in the search for offenders without necessarily respecting the
law.\" Moreover, the only case judged on the basis of information
collected in this way resulted in a dismissal, the agents who had
collected the evidence having failed to declare this collection to the
CNIL. Companies sometimes go further in their desire to track and
control users, as shown by the pitiful Sony-BMG rootkit affair. This
small program integrated into audio CDs was installed on the computer
and connected to the Internet without the user\'s knowledge to send
Sony-BMG information on the CDs listened to, while preventing more than
three copies of the discs purchased from being made. Faced with the
scandal, Sony-BMG put an end to the process, replaced the infected CDs
and provided means of eradicating the spyware. \"This affair, like the
desire of the majors to impose DRM (technical protection measures to
prevent music piracy), shows above all the desire of these companies to
control users to the detriment of respect for their private lives,\"
believes Loïc Dachary. The CIA is listening Today, the most pernicious
aspect of tracking on the Internet comes from state surveillance,
particularly in the context of the fight against terrorism. In the
United States, the USA Patriot Act requires airlines and travel agencies
selling trips to the country to provide personal data on visitors, such
as credit card numbers and the email address used to book the flight.
The American government can use this information to verify the
traveler\'s purchases, before and after their stay in the United States,
and to consult the letters sent and received in their mailbox! As noted
by Blandine Poidevin, a lawyer at the Lille and Paris bars specializing
in Internet law, \"we don\'t know how this data will be used. It can be
redistributed to any organization, without control. Which opens the door
to the most absolute arbitrariness. The worst thing is that we can\'t do
anything because the European Union has accepted this constraint even
though it is completely illegal under French law and European
directives.\" Don\'t think that you\'re not at risk just because you
have \"nothing to hide.\" As one organizer of the Big Brother Awards,
which denounces organizations and individuals with little respect for
privacy, points out, \"we have seen perfectly innocent people suspected
of terrorism. And we can no longer count those \"who had nothing to
reproach themselves for\", victims of regimes that thought
differently\... We must not mix everything up: having nothing to hide is
one thing, demanding respect for one\'s private life is another.\" How
can you protect yourself in these circumstances? First of all, replies
Damien Bancal: \"Just as you lock your door, you have to be careful
about your behavior on the Web.\" Then, by updating your operating
system and software, to benefit from the best reliability. Finally,
prevent intruders from reading your email, using data encryption
software, such as PGP. Knowing that it remains difficult to escape the
multiple eyes that watch over you\...

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1409

For three years now, a young company has been making its mark in
Sherbrooke and elsewhere in Quebec in a specific niche in IT services:
Révolution Linux. The company is a specialized software infrastructure
services company, and it is in the process of obtaining ISO 9001:2000
certification. Last year, the company was a finalist in the \"young
company\" category at the Reconnaissance Estrie gala. It was founded by
men with complementary IT skills: Benoît des Ligneris, Jean-Michel Dault
(who each hold 45 percent of the shares) and Francis Giraldeau
(co-founder of the Edulinux project). \"We set up in Sherbrooke at the
end of my master\'s and doctoral studies at the Université de
Sherbrooke,\" says the company\'s president, Mr. des Ligneris. It should
be noted that Mr. Dault is the co-founder of Abacom and NetRevolution.
The company, which now has 17 employees, specializes in infrastructure
services, everything related to the world of servers, security,
networks, and it has the particularity of working mainly with free
software, that is to say free and that customers can modify and
redistribute; software that is therefore economical for customers who
integrate it without having to pay a license. It offers solutions, among
other things, for email servers, antispam and antivirus filters, network
consulting, with a specialty in the deployment of thousands of users.
\"Our first market is school boards. It started with Edulinux,\" notes
Benoît des Ligneris, who holds a doctorate in physics. \"The
organizations that we aim to support to help them save money are the
government and the health world.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1410

The debates on the future of books and the digital revolution are off to
a bad start. Many booksellers are worried that some publishers,
endangering the very existence of bookstores, to which they owe so much,
have already embarked on the path of \"dematerialization of books\". The
publishers incriminated protest: digital technology does not threaten
bookstores in any way; the paper book will be the future of books for a
long time to come, and bookstores its preferred means of distribution.
The fact is, we believe, that the development of digital books and
online sales is inevitable and that its effects on bookstores will be
considerable. The most catastrophic scenario is that of the
disappearance of a large proportion of independent bookstores, as
happened a few years ago for record stores. Booksellers will not be the
only victims. Publishers, whose business will still depend on the
existence of a dense network of bookstores, will also pay a high price.
This scenario is not at all improbable. In fact, it is probably the most
plausible at present. Competition from online \"bookstores\" such as
Amazon or Fnac already has a high cost for traditional bookstores, a
cost that will most certainly continue to increase. Once digital book
technology is sufficiently developed and disseminated, essential parts
of book production (manuals, practical books) will initially escape
traditional bookstores and, so to speak, destroy the current bases of
the book and bookstore economy. This development will be further
aggravated, as far as paper books are concerned, by the development of
print-to-order services and by that of electronic paper - which combines
the respective advantages of paper and digital. It would be wrong to see
the latter as nothing more than a chimera: the British company Plastic
Logic, for example, is preparing to market electronic paper within three
years, the prototypes of which are already very convincing. The only
remaining obstacle to this upheaval is the interests of the major
publishing companies, whose profits are known to come largely from their
activities as distributors and broadcasters, profits which are therefore
threatened by the digital book. As soon as Editis, Hachette, Gallimard
and Flammarion-Rizzoli have solved this equation and found a way to make
more profit from digital than from paper, a large part of publishing
will quickly switch to the digital age. And certainly, since its
sacrifice allows them to maintain or increase their profits, these
groups will not shed tears, or even crocodile tears, over the bookstore,
whose independence they have already considerably reduced through their
commercial practices. The outlook for booksellers is therefore not very
encouraging. In these conditions, it is rather indecent to urge them to
\"be positive\", as if the difficulties they already face did not exist,
as if the threats weighing on them were not real, as if it were enough,
to face them, to demonstrate a willingness to adapt to the new times. We
therefore fully understand the anger of Christian Thorel, Jean-Marie
Sevestre and Mathieu de Montchalin (Le Monde of December 15, 2006). But
what to do? In order to preserve and even develop the independent
bookstore, it is necessary to develop a realistic strategy, commensurate
with the \"power\" of digital technology and capable of diverting part
of it to the benefit of bookstores. Because if the Internet and the
digital book have the power to radically transform the world of books,
reading habits, and the behavior of book buyers, it is because they are
endowed with a certain power, a certain attractiveness; It is good that
they have their interests and advantages, capable of meeting or arousing
the needs and desires of readers. The sites already developed by some
bookstores and the projects of online sales platforms common to several
independent bookstores are encouraging first steps, but they certainly
do not constitute a response to the extent of the transformations
underway. Only a few will perhaps come out on top. From this point of
view, the choice of some booksellers to join the Amazon Marketplace
program is not unrealistic - in the short term. In the longer term, Joël
Faucilhon, the founder of lekti-ecriture.com, recently stressed (Le
Monde, November 30, 2006) how much such a strategy increased the
dependence of bookstores, transformed into Amazon\'s outsourced stocks.
It is also almost certain that, as in the United States, Amazon will
take advantage of its hegemony to reduce the share of sales profits
going to associated booksellers. Two complementary responses can be
provided: on the one hand, the creation of appropriate tools allowing
booksellers to create and manage, easily and at a lower cost, their own
online sales sites; on the other hand, the creation of a shared
platform, open to all booksellers who would like to join it, offering
the same services as the large existing online bookstores, and more. But
these projects require technological expertise and significant initial
investments. The community of promoters of free software could play an
essential role here. Booksellers may also find unexpected support in
Google and its Google Books and Google Base services. Finally, the
State\'s bookstore support policy, based on a book economy doomed to
disappear, should be radically reoriented to take into account the
challenge posed by digital technology. Public funds would probably be
better spent supporting initiatives to help booksellers enter the
digital age than maintaining the illusion that it is possible, with a
little help, to continue as if nothing had happened. The Post Office
would also have its role to play, by offering booksellers reasonable, if
not advantageous, prices. It is on this condition that the inclusion of
books in the city and the fundamental role of facilitators and promoters
of independent and demanding publishing that booksellers play can be
preserved. Booksellers will have to redefine and reinvent their
profession. Supporting them on this path means helping ourselves,
publishers who do not consider books to be a commodity like any other.
It also means helping society as a whole, which would suffer greatly
from a reduction in the diversity of media and networks for the
dissemination and circulation of thought and ideas.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1411

What you told me, I heard. What I knew, you confirmed. Today, I propose
the presidential pact: 100 proposals so that France can rediscover a
shared ambition, pride, and fraternity (\...). This presidential pact,
it is together that we will implement it (\...). THE PRESIDENT OF
REGAINED CONFIDENCE 1. - Increase during the five-year term of the
research budget and public credits for innovation by 10% per year
(\...). 2. - Implement an industrial policy capable of preparing for the
future and reducing the risks of relocation with the creation of a
National Agency for Reindustrialization. 3. - Support SMEs \[small and
medium-sized enterprises\] by creating regional public participation
funds and by reserving a share for them in public markets. 4. - Give
priority to business investment with a lower corporate tax rate if the
profit is reinvested and a higher rate if it is distributed to
shareholders. 5. - Secure the path of young creators by supporting the
creation of businesses, by generalizing the creation workshops in all
regions, by improving the social protection of entrepreneurs and by
setting up a mutual guarantee mechanism (\...). 6. - Reform the State. A
successful decentralization. Quality public services present throughout
the territory and accessible via the Internet. Generalization of free
software in the administration. THE PRESIDENT OF GUARANTEED PURCHASING
POWER 7. - The minimum wage will be raised to 1,500 euros as soon as
possible in the legislature (\...) A national conference on salaries,
incomes and growth bringing together the social partners will be
organized in June 2007 (\...). 8. - Immediately revalue small pensions:
they will be increased by 5%. The minimum old-age pension will be paid
monthly. The payment of social security pensions will be restored on the
first day of each month. 9. - Immediately increase allowances for people
with disabilities by 5%. 10. - Double the back-to-school allowance,
which will be paid to families in two installments. 11. - Bank charges
will be regulated by the State. Bank charges and penalties related to
payment incidents will be capped (\...). 12. - Increase housing benefits
so as to limit the amount of housing expenses for low-income households
to 25%. Build 120,000 social housing units per year thanks to an
incentive for the Livret A. The State will be able to replace mayors who
do not apply the SRU law \[solidarity and urban renewal, which requires
municipalities with more than 3,500 inhabitants to respect a quota of
20% of social housing\]. Create a public deposit service (\...). In
return, the procedures for evicting tenants in bad faith will be
simplified. Make tax benefits and public aid conditional on rent
moderation. Re-let speculative vacant housing (\...). In social housing,
tenants who have paid their rent for fifteen years will be able to
access property ownership. Financially sanction municipalities that do
not respect the average ratio (\...) for emergency accommodation. 13. -
Set up several price indices reflecting household spending (\...). THE
PRESIDENT OF WORK FOR ALL 14. - Make public aid to companies conditional
on a commitment not to lay off employees when the company is making
substantial profits and obtain reimbursement in the event of relocation.
15. - Adjust aid to companies and exemptions from social security
contributions according to the nature of employment contracts and
eliminate the CNE \[new hire contract\] to make the CDI \[permanent
contract\] the rule. 16. - Develop collective bargaining at all levels
and on all topics (\...). On the 35-hour week: open negotiations to
determine how to consolidate this achievement and reduce its negative
effects for workers and employees. 17. - Create the right to a first job
for young people, so that no young person remains unemployed for more
than six months without access to training, supported employment or paid
tutoring. Open 500,000 springboard jobs to young people (\...). 18. -
Establish a zero-rate plan of 10,000 euros for each young person to help
them build a project. 19. - Set up an active solidarity income (RSA)
allowing the improvement of a third of their resources for any
beneficiary of minimum social benefits returning to work. 20. -
Systematically implement a process for validating acquired professional
experience and recognize everyone\'s right to training and retraining
inversely proportional to the length of their studies. 21. - Establish a
professional social security system guaranteed by the State, allowing
each person without employment to be offered (\...): remuneration for
one year, equal to 90% of the last net salary received; qualifying
training; personalized assistance in finding employment. This service
will be provided by the public employment service. THE PRESIDENT OF
EDUCATIONAL AND CULTURAL SUCCESS 22. - Organize a general assembly of
teachers in a participatory manner (\...). 23. - Establish a public
early childhood service and compulsory schooling from the age of 3
(\...). 24. - Organize free academic support for all students using
tutors. 25. - Limit the number of students per class in CP and CE1 in
ZEP \[priority education zones\] to 17 and set the allocation to schools
per student in difficulty at 25% more than the ordinary allocation.
26. - Revise the school map to eliminate school ghettos, ensure social
diversity and establish priority education networks. 27. - Strengthen
the adult presence in establishments (\...). 28. - Establish preparatory
classes for the grandes écoles in neighborhoods that do not have them
(\...). 29. - Create parent jobs, generalize parent schools and family
mediation consultations (\...). 30. - \[Universities\] Adopt a
programming law. In five years, spending per student will be brought to
the same level as the average for OECD countries. Strengthen the
autonomy of universities within the national framework. Involve the
regions (\...). 31. - Create a public guidance service (\...). 32. -
Autonomy allowance for young people, subject to resource conditions
(\...). 33. - Initiate the national project proposed by the Council for
Employment, Income and Social Cohesion \[for the 190,000 young people
left behind by the education system\]. 34. - Support cultural creation
and employment. 35. - Include education and artistic practice at all
levels from nursery school to university (\...). THE PRESIDENT OF SOCIAL
SECURITY 36. - Implement a major plan for the prevention and research of
serious diseases (\...). 37. - Ensure sustainable funding for public
hospitals, (\...) while ensuring territorial equality of access to care.
38. - Create clinics, particularly in rural areas. 39. - Implement a
youth health card for 16-25 year-olds entitling them to one free
consultation per semester. Free contraception for young women under 25.
40. - Strengthen the resources of school and university medicine, and
occupational medicine. 41. - Reaffirm the right to CMU \[universal
health coverage\] and sanction refusals of care. 42. - Adapt the
conditions for granting the disabled adult allowance (AAH) to
progressive diseases with uncertain diagnosis. 43. - Implement a policy
to combat obesity (\...). 44. - Restore the resources removed by the
right for care for foreigners in an irregular situation (\...). 45. -
Negotiate with social partners to strengthen the independence of
occupational medicine. 46. - Defend access to care for patients in
developing countries (\...). 47. - Open broad negotiations with social
partners, in particular on setting a minimum guaranteed pension, taking
into account arduous work, the employment of seniors, the method of
financing special schemes, and the upgrading of the pension reserve
fund. 48. - Develop home care for the elderly. 49. - Increase the number
of places in reception facilities (\...). THE PRESIDENT OF THE FIGHT
AGAINST ALL FORMS OF VIOLENCE 50. - Education programs to teach children
to manage conflicts through speech (\...). Guarantee everyone can travel
without fear on public transport (\...). Place guards in all social
housing. 51. - Fight against school violence (\...). Recruit middle
school supervisors, provide each establishment with a school nurse and a
full-time social worker. 52. - Implement a policy for the early
prevention of violence (\...); develop juvenile brigades in each police
station in large urban areas. (\...) Emergency plan for juvenile
justice. Elimination of prison sentences for minors except in cases of
serious harm to persons; development of reinforced educational centers,
if necessary with military supervision. 53. - Adopt a framework law on
domestic violence (\...). 54. - Create a new neighborhood police force
(\...). Assign experienced police officers, with real pay differentials,
to more difficult areas (\...). 55. - Facilitate and modernize the
filing of complaints (\...). Make a lawyer available to victims of
serious violence within an hour of filing a complaint. 56. - Double the
justice budget to make it faster and more respectful of rights. 57. -
Strengthen legal aid. Strengthen justice and law centers. Public service
to help recover damages awarded to victims. 58. - Ensure the presence of
a lawyer from the first hour of police custody. Strictly regulate the
use of pretrial detention (\...). Ensure conditions in prisons that
allow the reintegration of the detainee. Create an independent prison
monitoring body. 59- Modify the composition of the High Council of the
Judiciary to guarantee its pluralism and the balance between magistrates
and non-magistrates. Recompose the judicial organization (\...). Reform
the labor justice system after consultation (\...). Establish the
possibility of conducting \"group actions\". THE PRESIDENT OF
ENVIRONMENTAL EXCELLENCE 60. - Anticipate the depletion of oil by
massively supporting renewable energies to reach 20% of consumption in
2020 (\...). Create a public energy hub between EDF and GDF. 61. -
Generalize insulation and energy savings in housing. (\...) Develop
public transport thanks to an exceptional levy on the superprofits of
oil companies. Apply the polluter-pays principle (\...). Establish the
truth of the costs of transporting goods by road by negotiating an
eco-tax (\...). 62. - Make new building permits conditional on the
adoption of High Environmental Quality objectives across the entire
public housing stock. Encourage eco-industries by a VAT tending towards
zero. 63. - Create a position of Deputy Prime Minister responsible for
sustainable development. The Deputy Prime Minister\'s remit will be
extended to include regional planning. Transform the Economic and Social
Council into the Economic, Social and Environmental Council (EESC).
64. - Promote the creation of a World Environment Organisation. 65. -
Promote the reorientation of the CAP (Common European Agricultural
Policy) towards agri-environmental aid and ensure transparency and
better distribution of aid. Transfer the management of direct aid to the
regions. Encourage farmers\' contributions to energy supply (biomass,
biofuels, biogas, wind farms). 66. - Stop field trials of GMOs, pending
the results of a major public debate (\...). 67. - Encourage, through
tax incentives, industries that commit to eliminating toxic compounds
beyond the constraints imposed by the European Reach regulation.
Implement a national pesticide reduction program. Achieve the zero
industrial waste objective by 2012. 68. - Promote the idea of a \"global
CAP\" (\...). THE PRESIDENT OF A NEW REPUBLIC 69. - Establish the
non-accumulation of mandates for parliamentarians. 70. - Introduce a
proportional element for the election of deputies and modify the voting
method for the election of senators. 71. - The Prime Minister will seek
the confidence of Parliament upon his appointment, the blocked vote and
49-3 will be abolished for ordinary laws. The presidency of the Finance
Committee will be entrusted to a member of the opposition. 72. -
Eliminate the Senate\'s right of veto in constitutional matters. 73. -
Introduce participatory democracy in all public authorities (\...).
Citizens who have collected one million signatures will be able to ask
Parliament to examine a proposed law. 74. - Refuse any challenge to the
1905 law on the separation of Church and State and include a charter of
secularism in the Constitution. 75. - Give the right to vote in local
elections to foreigners who have been legally resident in France for
more than five years. 76. - Systematically organize consultation and
negotiation prior to any reform in social matters, by basing the
representativeness of organizations on the election and by generalizing
the principle of majority agreement. (\...) 77. - Promote mass unionism
through transparent public funding and by instituting systematic
information on union rights (\...). 78. - Establish a civic service for
young people. 79. - Establish a High Authority for Pluralism. (\...)
80. - Strengthen anti-concentration measures. 81. - Tax advertising
revenues from private channels in favour of public broadcasting. 82. -
Guarantee territorial continuity by imposing reinforced public service
obligations on airlines. 83. - Introduce teaching about overseas
territories in programmes, particularly on the history of slavery. 84. -
Apply the principles of environmental excellence to overseas territories
(\...). 85. - Enforce gender equality, particularly at work (\...).
86. - Strengthen the resources of the High Authority for the Fight
against Discrimination. 87. - Guarantee equal rights for same-sex
couples. THE PRESIDENT OF A FRANCE STRONG IN EUROPE AND ACTIVE FOR PEACE
IN THE WORLD 88. - Build a Europe that is more protective and more in
tune with the needs of its citizens. Rapidly implement ambitious common
policies on major issues (research/innovation, energy, environment);
preserve, through a framework directive, the development of quality
public services. 89. - Include the growth-employment objective in the
statutes of the European Central Bank; create a eurozone government.
90. - Raise living standards and social protection in all European
countries through a social protocol. 91. - Negotiate an institutional
treaty subject to referendum so that Europe functions more
democratically and more efficiently. 92. - Launch with our European
partners an initiative for an International Conference on Peace and
Security in the Middle East. 93. - Equip our national defence with
resources that are equal to the new risks. Our nuclear deterrent
capacity must be preserved. 94. - Include our defence effort in a
European security policy. (\...) The objective is both to strengthen our
security and to rationalise our expenditure. 95. - Introduce a hierarchy
of standards into the WTO that balances commercial measures with respect
for social and environmental standards. Deeply reform the IMF and the
World Bank (\...); Tobin-type tax on financial flows. 96. - Move towards
genuine co-development by promoting concrete projects directly involving
beneficiaries. 97. - Relaunch Euro-Mediterranean cooperation. 98. -
Introduce a visa allowing multiple round trips over several years, so
that migration adapts to the real needs of the labour market. 99. -
Re-establish the ten-year rule as a regularisation criterion. 100.-
Regularise undocumented migrants based on criteria based on the length
of stay in France, the schooling of children and the possession or
promise of an employment contract.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1412

1- The President of the regained confidence 1. Invest massively in
innovation and research: increase during the five-year term of the
research budget and public credits for innovation by 10% per year
\[\...\]. 2. Implement an industrial policy capable of preparing for the
future and reducing the risks of relocations with the creation of a
National Agency for Reindustrialization. 3. Support SMEs with the
creation of regional public participation funds and by reserving a share
for them in public markets. 4. Give priority to business investment with
a lower corporate tax rate if the profit is reinvested and higher if it
is distributed to shareholders. 5. Secure the path of young creators by
supporting the creation of businesses \[\...\]. 6. Reform the State: a
euro spent must be a useful euro. A successful decentralization. Quality
public services present throughout the territory and accessible via the
Internet. The generalization of free software in the administration. 2-
The president of guaranteed purchasing power 7. Increase salaries: - The
minimum wage will be increased to 1,500 euros, as early as possible in
the legislature. - A national conference on salaries, income and growth
bringing together social partners will be organized in June 2007. This
conference will be annual. 8. Immediately revalue small pensions: -
Small pensions will be increased by 5%. - The minimum old-age pension
will be paid monthly. - The payment of Social Security pensions will be
reestablished on the first day of each month. 9. Immediately revalue
allowances for people with disabilities by 5%. 10. Double the
back-to-school allowance, which will be paid to families in two
installments. 11. Reduce banking costs \[\...\]. 12. Lifelong housing
security: - Increase housing benefits to limit housing costs for
low-income households to 25%. - Build 120,000 social housing units per
year. - Create a public deposit service \[\...\]. - Make tax benefits
and public aid conditional on rent moderation. - Re-let speculative
vacant housing \[\...\]. - Encourage access to property by extending
zero-interest loans. In social housing, tenants who have paid their rent
for fifteen years will be able to access property. - Financially
sanction municipalities that do not respect the average ratio of one per
thousand inhabitants for emergency accommodation. 13. Set up several
price indices reflecting household spending (minimum social benefits,
minimum wage, pensions). 3- The president of work for all 14. Condition
public aid to companies on the commitment not to lay off workers when
the company generates substantial profits and obtain reimbursement in
the event of relocation. 15. Modulate aid to companies and exemptions
from social security contributions, depending on the nature of
employment contracts, and eliminate the CNE to make the CDI the rule.
16. Develop collective bargaining \[\...\]. On the 35-hour week: open
negotiations to determine how we can consolidate this achievement and
reduce its negative effects for workers and employees. 17. Create the
right to a first job for young people, so that no young person remains
unemployed for more than six months without having access to training,
supported employment or paid tutoring. Open 500,000 springboard jobs to
young people. 18. Establish a zero-rate plan of 10,000 euros for each
young person. 19. Establish an active solidarity income (RSA) allowing
the improvement of a third of their resources for any beneficiary of
minimum social benefits returning to work. 20. Strengthen the
qualification and ability to return to work of employees threatened with
dismissal \[\...\]. 21. Establish professional social security allowing
each person deprived of employment to be offered: - remuneration, for
one year, equal to 90% of the last net salary received; - qualifying
training; - personalized assistance in finding employment; 4- The
president of educational and cultural success 22. Organize a general
meeting of teachers to improve their working conditions, ensure full
recognition of their missions and prepare a multi-year recruitment and
training plan. 23. Establish a public early childhood service and
compulsory schooling from the age of 3. 24. Organize free academic
support for all students through tutors. 25. Limit the number of
students per class in CP and CE1 in ZEPs to 17. 26. Revise the school
map to eliminate school ghettos and ensure social diversity. 27.
Strengthen the adult presence in schools, including \[\...\] by having a
second adult in classes. 28. Establish preparatory classes for the
grandes écoles in neighborhoods that do not have them. 29. Create parent
jobs, generalize parent schools and family mediation consultations to
help them strengthen their authority. 30. Adopt a programming law to
give our universities the means to excel. \[\...\] Strengthen the
autonomy of universities within the national framework. Involve the
regions in upgrading universities (buildings, student housing, etc.).
31. Create a public guidance service so that young people are fully
informed of the opportunities offered by each sector. 32. Create an
autonomy allowance for young people subject to resource conditions. 33.
Initiate the national project proposed by the Council for Employment,
Income and Social Cohesion. 34. Support cultural creation and
employment. 35. Include artistic education and artistic practice at all
levels from kindergarten to university. 5- The President of Social
Security 36. Implement a plan for the prevention and research of serious
diseases (cancer, AIDS, Alzheimer\'s, orphan diseases). 37. Ensure
sustainable funding for public hospitals. 38. Create dispensaries,
particularly in rural areas. 39. Implement a health card for young
people aged 16 to 25, entitling them to one free consultation per
semester. Free contraception for young women under 25. 40. Strengthen
the resources of school, university and occupational medicine. 41.
Reaffirm the right to CMU and sanction refusals of care. 42. Adapt the
conditions for granting the disabled adult allowance (AAH) to
progressive diseases with uncertain diagnosis. 43. Implement a policy to
combat obesity \[\...\]. 44. Restore resources for care for illegal
immigrants. 45. Negotiate with social partners to strengthen the
independence of occupational medicine. 46. Defend access to care for
patients in developing countries by promoting less expensive generic
drugs. 47. Pensions. Open broad negotiations on: - setting a minimum
guaranteed pension close to the minimum wage, - increasing small
pensions, - taking into account arduous work and family
responsibilities, - increasing the employment of seniors, - the method
of financing special schemes, - upgrading the pension reserve fund. 48.
Develop home care for the elderly. 49. Increase the number of places in
existing reception structures. 6- The president of the fight against all
forms of violence 50. Restore civility: - Teach children civility:
programs to educate children on respect for others to teach them to
manage conflicts through speech rather than violence. - Guarantee
everyone can travel without fear on public transport. - Put guards in
place in all social housing buildings. 51. Fight against school violence
by increasing the presence of adults in establishments: - Recruit middle
school supervisors. - Provide each establishment with a school nurse and
a full-time social worker. 52. Be firm with violent minors: - Early
prevention of violence: reinforced educational supervision, reference
tutors. - Develop juvenile brigades in each police station in large
urban areas. - Take firm and rapid sanctions (recruitment of juvenile
judges, educators, clerks) - New solutions to remove minors from
delinquency: abolition of prison sentences for minors except in cases of
serious personal injury; reinforced educational centers, if necessary
with military supervision. 53. Make the fight against domestic violence
a national priority; framework law on domestic violence. 54. Create a
new neighborhood police force to better ensure daily security: - Fairer
distribution of personnel: priority to sensitive areas. - Assign
experienced, better-paid police officers to more difficult areas. 55.
Help victims: - Facilitate and modernize the filing of complaints:
improved reception at police stations, possibility of filing complaints
online. - Make a lawyer available to victims of serious violence within
one hour of filing a complaint. - Respond to the need for justice. 56.
Double the Justice budget to make it faster and more respectful of
rights. 57. Facilitate access to justice for the poorest: - Strengthen
legal aid. - Strengthen justice and law centres. - A public service to
help recover damages awarded to victims. 58. Protect citizens: - Ensure
the presence of a lawyer from the first hour of police custody. -
Strictly regulate the use of pretrial detention, in particular by
imposing time limits. - Strengthen alternatives to preventive
detention. - Ensure conditions in prisons that allow the reintegration
of the detainee. - Create an independent prison monitoring body. 59.
Make justice impartial and effective: - Modify the composition of the
High Council of the Judiciary to guarantee a balance between magistrates
and non-magistrates. - Reorganize the judicial system according to
demographics. - Reform labor justice. - Establish the possibility of
conducting \"group actions\". 7- The President of Environmental
Excellence 60. Prepare for the post-oil era: - Anticipate the depletion
of oil by massively supporting renewable energies to reach 20% of
consumption in 2020 \[\...\]. - Create a public energy hub between EDF
and GDF. 61. Fight against climate change: - Generalize insulation and
energy savings in housing. - Develop public transport thanks to an
exceptional levy on the superprofits of oil companies. - Apply the
polluter-pays principle \[\...\]. - Establish the truth of the costs of
transporting goods by road by negotiating an eco-tax to discourage
transport by truck and transfer freight to rail. 62. Develop
environmental added value: - Condition new building permits on the
adoption of HQE objectives in the entire public real estate portfolio. -
Encourage eco-industries by reducing VAT towards zero. 63. Mobilise the
whole of society in the service of environmental excellence: - Create a
position of Deputy Prime Minister responsible for sustainable
development. - Transform the Economic and Social Council into an
Economic, Social and Environmental Council (CESE). 64. Promote the
creation of a World Environment Organisation (WEO). 65. Promote
agriculture that ensures quality food that respects the environment: -
Promote the added value of our agricultural products in order to improve
incomes and encourage young people to set up; - Promote the
reorientation of the CAP towards agri-environmental aid; - Transfer the
management of direct aid to agriculture to the regions; - Encourage
farmers\' contributions to the supply of energy. 66. Stop field trials
of GMOs \[\...\]. 67. Prevent the impact of pollution on health: -
Encourage industries that commit to eliminating toxic compounds beyond
the constraints imposed by the European REACH regulation. - Implement a
national program to reduce the use of pesticides. - Achieve the goal of
zero industrial waste by 2012. 68. Promote the idea of a \"global CAP\"
to \[\...\] give a real chance to agriculture in developing countries.
8- The President of a New Republic 69. Establish the non-accumulation of
mandates for parliamentarians. 70. Introduce a proportional element for
the election of deputies, modify the voting method for the election of
senators. 71. Revalue the role of Parliament: the blocked vote and 49-3
will be abolished for ordinary laws. The presidency of the Finance
Committees will be entrusted to a member of the opposition. 72. Remove
the Senate\'s right of veto in constitutional matters. 73. Introduce
participatory democracy in all public authorities (citizens\' juries,
participatory budgets, etc.). Citizens who have collected a million
signatures will be able to request the examination of a proposed law.
74. Refuse any challenge to the 1905 law, and integrate a charter of
secularism into the Constitution. 75. Give the right to vote in local
elections to foreigners who have been legally residing in France for
more than five years. 76. Systematically organize consultation and
negotiation prior to any reform in social matters \[\...\]. 77. Promote
mass unionism through transparent public funding \[\...\]. A tax credit
will be granted for union dues. 78. Establish a civic service for young
people. 79. Media. Establish a High Authority for Pluralism, whose
members will be appointed by Parliament by a 3/5 majority. 80.
Strengthen anti-concentration measures. 81. Tax advertising revenues
from private channels in favour of public broadcasting. 82. Overseas.
Guarantee territorial continuity by imposing reinforced public service
obligations on airlines. 83. Introduce teaching about Overseas in school
curricula, particularly on the history of slavery. 84. Apply the
principles of environmental excellence to the Overseas Territories
\[\...\]. 85. Enforce gender equality, particularly at work: -
Development of a charter for equal access and equal treatment
\[\...\]. - State commitment to equal promotion of women and men for
positions of responsibility. 86. Strengthen the resources of the High
Authority for the Fight against Discrimination (Halde). 87. Guarantee
equal rights for same-sex couples. 9- The president of a France strong
in Europe and active for peace in the world 88. Building a more
protective Europe, more in line with the needs of its citizens:
ambitious common policies in research and innovation, energy and the
environment. Preserving the development of quality public services. 89.
Including the growth and employment objective in the statutes of the
European Central Bank. Creating a government for the eurozone. 90.
Raising the standard of living and social protection in all European
countries through a social protocol. 91. Negotiating an institutional
treaty subject to referendum. 92. Launching with our European partners
an initiative for an International Conference on Peace and Security in
the Middle East. 93. Equipping our national defence with resources that
are equal to the new risks \[\...\]. Our nuclear deterrent capacity must
be preserved. 94. Including our defence effort in a European security
policy, with cooperation in research and innovation and equipment. 95.
Control globalization: introduce a hierarchy of standards at the WTO
that balances trade measures with respect for social and environmental
standards. Deeply reform the IMF and the World Bank. Implement a
Tobin-type tax on financial flows. 96. Review our development aid
policy: move towards genuine co-development by directly involving
beneficiaries. 97. Relaunch Euro-Mediterranean cooperation. 98.
Introduce a visa allowing multiple round trips \[\...\], so that
migration adapts to the real needs of the labor market. 99. Reestablish
the ten-year rule as a regularization criterion. 100. Regularize
undocumented immigrants based on criteria based on the length of
presence in France, the schooling of children and the possession or
promise of an employment contract.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1413

On the Saint-Martin-d\'Hères campus, near Grenoble, is one of the oldest
research laboratories in Europe specializing in machine translation,
Geta (Study Group for Machine Translation), a direct heir to France\'s
pioneering commitment in this field. At the dawn of the 1960s, when the
United States was beginning to despair of being able to instantly
translate natural language, the first experiments were underway in
France. In 1959, when Atala (Association for the Study and Development
of Machine Translation and Applied Linguistics) was founded, the CNRS
created Ceta (Study Center for Machine Translation). Eight years later,
the laboratory presented a pioneering result, the first demonstration of
translation from Russian to French on a computer. Since then, the
laboratory, a team made up of computer scientists and computational
linguists, has had its ups and downs. Detached from the CNRS, now called
Geta, it has lost some of its resources over the years. \"In 1960, it
had about forty people,\" explains its current director, Christian
Boitet. \"Today, we have eighteen permanent staff and twenty-five PhD
students, and the CNRS\'s investments have been steadily decreasing for
ten years.\" However, Geta has recently produced original research, such
as the development of the pivot language, an intermediate passage
between the source language (to be translated) and the target language
(the translation). Other successful projects have followed. But the
financial resources are no longer there. \"There is not much public
money in France for machine translation,\" laments Christian Boitet, who
also rants about the calls for tenders that are inevitably written in
English, even when they are European. In the United States, Darpa
\[Defense Research Agency, Editor\'s note\] is making gigantic financial
efforts. In France, there have been no major research and development
projects since 1992.\" While in Germany, adds Hervé Blanchon, lecturer
at the Pierre-Mendès-France University and member of Geta-Clips
(Language Communication and Human-System Interaction), a project is
bringing together 100 laboratories for translation applications intended
for mobile phones. Saint-Martin-d\'Hères special correspondent Here, of
course, we do not believe in perfect automated translation without human
intervention. \"It is an insoluble problem,\" believes Christian Boitet.
\"We would like three incompatible elements: automaticity, quality and
coverage.\" In Grenoble, we prefer to talk about CAT (computer-assisted
translation), which designs tools for the human translator. Among the
flagship projects of recent years, there is Lidia, on which Hervé
Blanchon worked, which focuses on interactive disambiguation: the system
provides several translation suggestions, for the human operator to
choose. As for the path of \"speech TAO\" (automatic oral
interpretation), it has been explored since 1996, with the entry of
France into the first international consortium C-Star (Consortium for
Speech Translation Advanced Research). It involves working on a system
of simultaneous oral translation for tourist reservations. But for
Christian Boitet, one of the ways to resolve the problem of translation,
which is so costly, may be found in a collaborative network of
translators on the Internet, organized on the model of that of the
online encyclopedia Wikipedia. \"When we see that Mozilla, a free
software, manages to be translated into seventy languages, we can
imagine using tools for pooling human translation such as
Wikitranslation.net.\" Another route to Babel opened by the Web.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1414

When we die, what will remain? A few old bones and the vague memory that
our friends will keep of us. Since the entry into the digital age, we
also leave behind countless traces (photos, videos, texts, etc.) on
blogs, forums, online shopping sites, emails, etc., so many digital and
rot-proof ashes that survive us, scattered in cyberspace. \"The dead
continue to exist as biomass and traces in global memory, in government
databases, family and professional archives, and in the emotional data
stored in the biomemory of our social network,\" analyzes the company
etoy.CORPORATION, at the initiative of a (very) long-term project,
Mission Eternity, which could profoundly reconfigure the cult of the
dead. The main arsenal of this Swiss artistic collective to access
immortality consists of creating \"capsules\" that contain digital
fragments of our lives, particles of data that would circulate forever
in the infosphere. Confronting time. Etoy (1) became known by heroically
standing up to the American toy giant eToys (with an \"s\") during a
historic performance battle, \"Toywar\", in 1999, to keep its domain
name (2). With Mission Eternity (3), the agitators confront existential
questions, such as memory (its preservation and loss), time and death. A
subject that arose while they were visiting retirement homes,
questioning the elderly on their relationship with new technologies.
\"Death was an obvious theme that came up often. While in our society,
it is taboo, they look it in the face. We wanted to do something with
the old, these people that no one really cares about. Moreover, death is
one of the most virtual things you can imagine, and the post-mortem
experience is a tailor-made subject for etoy," say agents etoy.ZAI,
president, and etoy.HAEFLIGER, in full white suits, met in a Parisian
bar. Two years ago, a dozen etoy agents, from various backgrounds
(architects, designers, researchers, lawyers, scientists), secluded
themselves in the Swiss mountains to think about the question. From this
brainstorming session came the idea of "arcanum capsule" (arcanum
meaning secret or mystery in Latin). "It's nothing really revolutionary,
people talk about the deceased, they tell each other stories to keep
them alive. Someone continues to exist as long as they are remembered."
This capsule would store information about a missing person, visual
information, voice samples, photos of their family and friends, pieces
of music they liked, possibly a DNA extract, or messages for their loved
ones. Each capsule is identified by a code that allows access to its
contents. \"It is not a data cemetery but an interactive portrait of the
missing person,\" the authors specify. The project does not consist of
copying or cloning life in cyberspace. The content is carefully sorted,
in conciliation with the pilot, it is not exhaustive. Remembering is
also loss, forgetting.\" Sepp, the pioneer. For his experiments, etoy
needed a volunteer to encapsulate. His name is Sepp Keiser, he lives in
the small town of Zug in Switzerland and is 83 years old. This microfilm
pioneer, an actor in his spare time, makes an ideal test pilot. \"We
wanted a series of pioneers of the information age, Mr. Keiser is in
some ways a grandfather of etoy,\" rejoices the ZAI agent. Between the
summer of 2005 and the winter of 2006, they met their pilot several
times, collected and scanned official documents, photographs,
interviews, recordings. \"We needed the user to be alive, to meet him in
order to define with him his post mortem plan. Because the objective is
not to constitute an inert capsule, but that it continues to live, like
a digital ghost. We can, for example, imagine that a program activates
it in the future, that the capsule contacts its friends on a certain
date, or that a loved one will find flowers on the doorstep with a card
from someone who died years before.\" Etoy does not just collect digital
data, but simultaneously develops the IT environment that will allow
this project to be deployed. They are currently finalizing an open
source software, the \"Angel-App\", which allows easy distribution of
the capsules between the \"guardian angels\" who host them on their
computer. Anyone who has a computer and is willing to share at least
50MB of disk space can volunteer for the role of \"angel\". Free
software. The Mission Eternity project raises another major problem:
rapid technological obsolescence. \"Digital systems for saving memory
are very powerful but also opaque, you can always slide an old film roll
in front of a light to see what\'s on it, but a CD will be unreadable
for a day.\" Etoy chose open source and a decentralized peer-to-peer
system, the best guarantee that the project can continue. \"This is
obviously not a commercial project but an artistic one. Mission Eternity
is built on free software and public licenses to guarantee the
circulation of this data, essential to keep the drivers and the system
alive.\" Under the protection of the thousands of Mission Eternity
angels (alive), the pilots (dead) travel through space and time forever.
The project is not limited to intangible digital data drifting in
cyberspace. It also includes biological remains. \"At first, we had not
considered that we would have to take care of the body of our pilot, but
we did not want it to remain just an abstract concept.\" Sepp Keiser, a
little disconcerted by the request, finally gave them his permission,
after asking his wife\'s opinion. Several high-tech burials are
envisaged: in the event of burial, a tombstone equipped with a semacode
(a sort of graphic code) readable by a cell phone camera, which will
display the contents of the associated capsule. Another option, this one
nomadic: mold the ashes in cement and plug the resulting object into a
sarcophagus. Pixelated ashes. The development of the Sarcophagus, a
mobile cemetery that could contain the ashes of a thousand pilots, is
already well advanced. It is a 6-metre-long container whose interior is
lined with 17,000 light-emitting diodes (LEDs), as many pixels, forming
a screen that displays the contents of the capsules. \"When we remember
someone, we often see them blurry, remembering also means losing
resolution. In the sarcophagus, we have this same crudely pixelated
image, if we look closely, we see nothing,\" explains agent Haefliger.
The container, completed between January and June 2006 in Zurich, has
already travelled quite a bit, to San Jose in California for the ZeroOne
digital art festival, then to Burning Man in Nevada. During their
American escapade, the agents on a mission came into contact with the
family of Timothy Leary, the LSD pope, who died of cancer in 1996, in
the secret hope of recovering the rest of his ashes (let us recall that
7 grams have already been sent into space aboard a rocket with the
remains of 24 other people, including those of the creator of Star
Trek). \"We had read his book Design For Dying, and many of his ideas
coincided with ours, in particular his desire to face death joyfully
rather than ignoring it.\" Leary did not ultimately commit suicide live
on the Internet as announced, nor did he have himself cryogenically
frozen, although he was in contact with two specialized companies, but
died peacefully among his loved ones. \"Leary was obsessed with death,
he collected a huge amount of documentation with 3D scans of his body,
his DNA\... He would surely have joined our project.\" Finally, the
family was convinced and the rest of Timothy Leary\'s ashes should be
given to them soon during a ceremony in New York. \"Mission Eternity is
compatible with all religions,\" the two etoy agents say. \"Among us,
some are believers, others atheists. The idea was to think about death
differently, without being dogmatic on the subject, to invent new
rituals.\" (1) www.etoy.com (2) http://toywar.etoy.com
(3)www.etoy.com//files/presentations /m221e_slideshowoct2006self.mov

515. ## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1415

516. ## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1416

AUDIO. The tiny iPod Shuffle is now available in colors. Blue, pink,
green, orange or silver, it remains at the same price (89 euros) and
retains the same characteristics: 1 GB capacity (around 240 songs),
featherweight 15 g and battery life of up to 12 hours. With this
version, Apple hopes to attract fans of customization, but also
consumers tempted to match their MP3 player to their clothes or to
certain occasions. EDUCATION. A free mobile office for high school
students is what the Ile-de-France region will offer to 175,000 young
people next year. In fact, the office is a USB key that contains several
free software programs, including the Firefox browser and Thunderbird
messaging, an audio and video player and an instant messaging service.
Students will thus be able to access their computer environment
(documents, address book, Internet favorites) from any computer. VIDEO.
Canon is set to launch a consumer HD camcorder with some amazing
features. The Canon HV20 HDV1080i features a 2.96-megapixel sensor that
can shoot in 1920 x 1080 resolution and an HDMI connector for connecting
to a compatible HDTV or computer. It has a 10x optical zoom with image
stabilization and an instant autofocus system.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1417

The CRTC may be getting tangled up in telephone wires, but Internet
telephony is not limited to four companies. Especially since the free
software community is starting to take an interest in this phenomenon.
In any case, for a second home phone, for a home office or to cut
long-distance charges, solutions exist. Gizmo The Gizmo Project is an
instant messaging service combined with a voice service that can
communicate with residential and cellular telephone lines. The creators
of Gizmo are also the ones who developed the SIP technology for voice
over IP (VoIP, for short), on which many other Internet telephony
operators are based. The software allows free communication between
members of the Gizmo community. It is compatible with computers running
Windows, Linux, Mac OS and even several mobile device operating systems.
Ultimately, by jumping from one Internet access point to another with
any mobile device equipped with a Wi-Fi port, it becomes a particularly
affordable alternative to cell phones. Main drawback: it is impossible
to buy an unlimited calling plan in the country. Each call to a number
that does not belong to the Gizmo community is billed, starting at 1.2
cents per minute. Another problem is that obtaining a telephone number
to receive calls on Gizmo is limited to the Canadian area code 204,
which is in Manitoba. For a 514 number, you have to obtain it from an
independent provider and tinker with everything yourself. Skype It is
difficult to talk about IP telephony without talking about Skype.
Especially since the software has evolved greatly in recent times.
Today, it is a complete telecommunications solution, with instant
messaging and video messaging. And once you have tried \"video chat\" &
That said, Skype has recently revised its prices upwards. It\'s now
thirty US dollars per year for an unlimited Canada-US plan (still a good
deal), or 2.1 cents per minute per call without a plan, to call people
who don\'t use Skype (otherwise it\'s free, obviously). Voipbuster The
Voipbuster service was launched in Germany a little over a year ago.
It\'s a minimalist service, which only offers IP telephony from a
personal computer. The software can redirect the outgoing call to the
home phone. This makes it an affordable solution for long distance
calls. Calls are free everywhere in Canada, the United States, the
United Kingdom, Australia and many other countries.
alain.mckenna@lapresse.ca

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1418

A little more and she would have recycled herself. It was in 2002.
Marie-Chantale Turgeon had been busy in multimedia for four years. And
was moping. \"I was going to leave all that behind. Because I found that
the Web was becoming the equivalent of what we saw on television. People
were sitting there, quite passive. You had a screen, and all you could
do was change pages. There wasn\'t really any room to publish your own
content. I found it one-way. I was on the verge of changing direction.\"
Until, while browsing the net, she discovered a blog. Then she decided
to emerge in the blogosphere. While staying in Germany, the Montrealer
opted for a travel diary, which she sprinkled with comments on the
music, films and books that punctuated her exile. At first, her family
and friends were her only readership. However, thanks to the magic of
search engines, her blog attracts hundreds of Internet users who share
her interests and view the photos she has taken with her cell phone.
Since she writes in English, her visitors come from all over the world.
Delighted with the experience, Marie-Chantale extends it back to Quebec.
Two years and hundreds of posts later, she is one of the first in Quebec
to broadcast a podcast. Once a week, the music lover puts online a
twenty-minute amateur radio show that Internet users can download to
their MP3 players. She broadcasts independent artists found on the Web
and intersperses the recording with comments on the shows she has seen.
By the end of 2005, her podcast had become so popular that it burst onto
the prestigious pages of the American magazine Spin. But the young woman
was already elsewhere. With her camera, she makes short videos that she
posts on her blog, Vu d\'ici. With a colleague, she then founded the
Meïdia studio, which created the étoiles-du-web.ca website, the first
Quebec platform to combine blogs, videos, audio and text. What is Web
2.0? It is Marie-Chantale\'s. And all those who, like her, are no longer
content to visit pages, but want to participate in the content. In the
spirit of the \"software\" that guided the first steps of microcomputing
in the 60s and 70s. \"What was initially in the area of freedom of
source code has gradually migrated to the area of content,\" summarizes
Thierry Bardini, professor in the communications department at the
University of Montreal. \"That is to say, we have started to apply the
same notions not to the codes that make the machine run, but to the
content (music, images, text).\" This is YouTube, with its 100 million
amateur videos downloaded per day. MySpace, the new standard of culture
for 12-25 year-olds, which allows its members to have their own page and
share their musical tastes. Wikipedia, the online global encyclopedia
whose thousands of articles are written and corrected by Mr. and Mrs.
Average. Those are the best known. Added to this is a profusion of sites
of varying sizes, specialized or not, always built and enhanced by
users. The participants By the way, who is participating? People like
Pierre Léon, a Montreal taxi driver who writes about his night job, the
weird guys he drives, the pink-haired girls who squeegee, who has become
one of the most widely read bloggers in the province. Simon Pulsifer, a
young unemployed man from Ottawa who has authored two to three thousand
articles on Wikipedia, making him the most important contributor to
date. Michel Beaudet and his Têtes à claques, which have climbed into
the top 10 most visited sites in Quebec, with 2.1 million unique
visitors in November 2006. But there are also those who participate in
spite of themselves. We think of Lucie Laurier, who had the misfortune
of letting a breast slip out during a television interview, before
becoming the subject of a national scandal. Of the Star Wars kid, the
15-year-old from Trois-Rivières whose imaginary lightsaber fight has
been seen by 900 million people since his classmates posted the video on
the Web. Of Fidel Lachance, the country singer from Beauce who became
famous on YouTube (60,000 Internet users watched the interview he gave
to Anita Lachance) by distilling the witty remarks: \"We look for all
the hope in our life, and one day or another, we always find it in
hope.\" Web 2.0, it seems, celebrates collective intelligence as much as
its stupidity. Regardless, some see it as the advent of \"a digital
democracy.\" Like Time Magazine, which recently named \"You\" its person
of the year. Because, it says, \"you are leading the information age.\"
But are you really leading it? Thierry Bardini doubts it. \"They make me
laugh at Time. As if holding a video camera was making history. At the
same time, the guy who had the video camera when Rodney King was beaten
up made history in a way. (\...) In fact, we should say \"we,\" meaning
both everyone and no one - or just you because you\'re there at the
right time.\" Besides, we often forget that behind Web 2.0 there is a
great irony. Tim O\'Reilly, a businessman from the San Francisco Bay
Area, popularized the label in 2003 to help Silicon Valley emerge from
its torpor after the bursting of the Internet bubble in the late 1990s,
notes The Economist. Now here is the same valley populated by
individualistic entrepreneurs glorifying the virtues of participation
and collective consciousness. \"As if the libertarian bigwigs of new
technologies had suddenly become Maoists of the digital age.\" In any
case, in its special issue of Le Monde in 2007, the prestigious British
magazine predicted that, this year, blogs, podcasts and wikis will be
more accessible to ordinary mortals, like email. So, we will think of
Marie-Chantale Turgeon and tell ourselves that after all, she was just a
little ahead of us. mallard@lesoleil.com After the bursting of the
bubble, the Internet has been experiencing a new lease of life in recent
years, Web 2.0. Blogs, podcasts, wikis: a myriad of sites powered
directly by Internet users. But are you really leading the information
age?

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1419

New York - Since yesterday, most new microcomputers sold worldwide are
equipped with Vista, Microsoft\'s new operating system, a major gamble
for the group and a change of habit for hundreds of millions of
consumers. Microsoft\'s CEO and founder, Bill Gates, gave a grand
opening in New York on Monday evening for the release of Vista, the new
version of the Windows system. A system that already runs 95% of the
world\'s 900 million microcomputers. According to the IDC firm,
Microsoft should sell 100 million copies of Vista by 2007. Vista,
considered by experts to be more practical and more reliable than its
predecessor, but not revolutionary, cost Microsoft six billion in five
years of development. Compared to Windows XP, released in 2001, it
offers a new 3D graphic aspect, additional software (video editing,
Internet browsing, e-mail, calendar, games) and more practical menus.
The promotion reflects this huge gamble: a marketing campaign
(television, Internet, cinema, press) that has started in 20 countries
and will provide 6.6 billion \"opportunities to see\" the new software
in 60 days. After New York, Bill Gates went to London to claim that the
new system could bring about \"a complete change\" in the handling of a
computer. In Japan, queues of around 300 people formed in front of some
hypermarkets in Tokyo. The release of Vista to the general public was,
however, less spectacular in this country than that of Windows 95 in
1995, which had brought PCs into Japanese families for good. Promotional
events are also planned for the day in several capitals, at the Atomium
in Brussels, one of the main emblems of Belgium since its creation in
1958, and in Paris with a fireworks display at La Défense. According to
the American magazine Ad Age, the global campaign will cost 500 million,
an exceptional budget. Gradually, more than three-quarters of new PCs of
all brands, portable or not, will be sold this year with Vista - except
for \"Macs\", the machines of rival Apple. The whole question is to know
at what rate individuals and companies will adopt Vista and computers
powerful enough to install it. Vista has hardly any other competition
than the previous versions of Windows: Apple (Mac OS operating system)
has conquered only 3% to 5% of the market and free software, such as
Linux, less than 1%, according to the OneStat firm. For Microsoft, the
rapid success of Vista is crucial, because Windows software represents
30% of its sales and 60% of its operating profit. Vista should
mechanically increase its profits, because if the basic version costs as
much as XP (\$199), the Premium version, which offers the real new
features, costs \$239, 20% more. Microsoft hopes that at least 60% of
customers will choose the Premium version. Microsoft also put on sale
yesterday for the general public Office 2007, a new version of its suite
of office software (Word, Excel, PowerPoint), its other flagship
product. Together, the versions of Windows and Office represent
two-thirds of its sales and 90% of its profits. Some analysts, however,
predict that Vista will be the pinnacle of Microsoft and of the 22-year
history of Windows: multiple free software programs, financed by
advertising, are indeed flourishing on the Internet. Discreetly, Apple
is preparing the launch in the spring of its new operating system
\"Leopard\", which aims to be more innovative than Vista.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1420

New York - Starting today, most new microcomputers sold worldwide will
be equipped with Vista, Microsoft\'s new operating system, a major
gamble for the group and a change of habits for hundreds of millions of
consumers. Vista, considered by experts to be more practical and
reliable, but not revolutionary, was a colossal undertaking: it cost
Microsoft \$6 billion for its five years of development, Bill Gates
revealed in early January. In addition to a new graphic aspect, it
includes many software programs: video editing, Internet browsing,
e-mail, calendar, etc. Launched at the end of November for businesses,
it is the most advanced version of the Windows software series, which
drives more than 95% of the world\'s 900 million microcomputers. In
concrete terms, new PCs, whether portable or not, will gradually all be
pre-equipped with Vista, regardless of their brand - except Macs, the
computers of rival Apple, which run on a different system. The listed
price of a computer includes both the machine and the software. The
question is how quickly individuals and businesses will adopt Vista and
computers powerful enough for it. According to IDC, Microsoft should
sell 100 million copies by 2007, equipping nearly 10% of the world\'s
computers. Vista will replace previous versions of Windows, especially
XP, released in 2001, which is used by 87% of the world\'s PCs,
according to OneStat. Windows dominates consumer microcomputing: its
only rival, Apple (MacOS operating system), has only won 3% to 5% of the
market - although it has climbed a little in recent months - and free
software, such as Linux, less than 1%. For Microsoft, the stakes are
high, because Windows software represents about 30% of its turnover
(\$13 billion out of \$44 billion in 2005-2006) and two-thirds of its
operating profit (\$10 billion out of \$16 billion). Vista should
mechanically increase its profits, because if the basic version costs
the same as XP (\$199), the Premium version, the one that offers the
real new features, costs \$239, 20% more. Microsoft hopes that at least
60% of customers will choose the Premium version. Some analysts predict
that Vista will bring Microsoft an additional \$4 billion by 2007 and
generate \$70 billion for the global IT sector, as well as tens of
thousands of jobs. This is \"the best \$6 billion I\'ve ever spent,\"
Bill Gates told a few journalists in early January. Microsoft,
manufacturers like HP and Dell, and retailers are hoping for a major
recovery in the sector, slowed down by the price war.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1421

MICROSOFT MICROSOFT equips almost all of the world\'s 900 million PCs.
Its main competitor, Apple, which runs its famous Macs with another
operating system, represents no more than 5% of the global personal
computer market. As for Linux, the leader in open source that was
supposed to challenge its supremacy, it is still tiny at less than 1%.
In the crosshairs of the European Union Accused by the European
competition authorities of abusing its dominant position, the giant is
also in the crosshairs of consumer associations that denounce the
impossibility of finding machines on the market that are not equipped
with Windows. In France, UFC-Que choisir filed a summons in December
against three companies: the computer manufacturer Hewlett-Packard and
two distributors, an Auchan store in Bagnolet and a Darty store in
Paris. \"The choice of these brands is a bit of a coincidence, we could
have chosen other distributors or other computer manufacturers, believes
a spokesperson for the association. We wanted to launch an action, even
if it means extending it to others later.\" UFC-Que Choisir accuses them
of \"illegal tied selling\". In short, it believes that manufacturers
and distributors should offer customers the possibility of equipping
themselves with \"blank\" machines or equipped with systems that compete
with Microsoft\'s. This approach is a first in Europe. But the Trans
Atlantic Consumer Dialogue (TACD), an organization bringing together
European and American consumer associations, could follow. The American
giant, like all of the group\'s employees, believes that this
\"monopoly\" on the market for operating systems and software is not the
result of distortion of competition. \"We do not do joint sales,\"
insists Didier Burdinat, director of the Windows product line at
Microsoft France. \"We do not push people to buy a particular antivirus
or software with the operating system.\" Microsoft is not shouting too
loudly that the launch of Windows Vista will coincide to the day with
that of Office, its office suite, and Windows Live OneCare, its consumer
antivirus. \"Today, you can buy PCs without a system. Hundreds of
thousands of consumers do so,\" adds Didier Burdinat. He admits that
machine manufacturers are reluctant to create smaller production lines
for this clientele that is resistant to Microsoft products. \"The
industrial logic of manufacturers favors volumes. Otherwise, it costs
them money,\" he notes. Ensuring compatibility The \"microsofties\", the
group\'s employees, believe that they do everything they can to listen
to user criticism. For three years, the publisher has set up panels of
12 to 14 people who meet for a day or half a day. \"We launch
provisional versions of our products. This has been the case for Vista
for 24 months. And we are in permanent contact with about 170 user
community sites, observes Didier Burdinat. They give us their comments
in the most direct way. And among the opponents of Vista, we have
managed to convert a few.\" Microsoft assures that 80% of the software
that worked on Windows XP will be able to work with Vista. The remaining
20% will have to wait a little.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1422

Are you looking for an effective FTP client? An instant messaging
software compatible with more than one service (Google Talk, Yahoo, AIM,
etc.) or a digital calendar application that doesn\'t cost you several
dozen dollars? You\'ll find them on the Sourceforge site
(www.sourceforge.net). This is where the vast majority of free software
developed by the community or by developers who want to make the
greatest number of applications that are both versatile and free are
grouped together. And, often, offered on more than one platform:
Windows, Mac and Linux. Thus, free software for transferring files via
the FTP protocol, such as FileZilla, and an application for grouping all
of your instant messaging contacts, such as Gaim, are offered free of
charge on the Sourceforge site. And these are just a few examples: in
total, more than 100,000 applications are offered to the community,
under a dozen major categories (Security, VoIP, multimedia, etc.). All
this under the free software license.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1423

The Internet is one of the leitmotifs of the presidential campaign. Will
it be played out partly online? No one is able to answer. Neither is
Thierry Crouzet, a computer engineer, journalist and blogger (1), even
if his essay is subtitled \"How the Internet is shaking up politics\".
The Web has undoubtedly become a preferred campaign tool. In the United
States, Hillary Clinton has just announced her candidacy for the White
House in a video broadcast online. In France, the candidates all have a
foothold on the Internet, and low blows are also raining down in this
universe. The author\'s only warning, praising the power of the network:
\"I fear that the Internet is increasingly becoming a tool for
denigration.\" The first part of the essay recalls the major stages of
the conquest of the Internet by politics, dating back to the campaign of
the American Democrat Howard Dean in 2004, who emerged from anonymity
thanks to the visionary Joe Trippi. Then came the European referendum in
France and the emergence of Etienne Chouard out of nowhere. Another feat
of arms was the video of the Republican senator from Virginia George
Allen in which he is seen mocking a young man of Asian origin. This
video, broadcast in November 2006, probably destroyed his hopes of one
day reaching the highest responsibilities. \"Technology gives us the
means to unite into a new power: the fifth power, an emerging power,
unfinished, still finding its feet but already capable of weighing in
political life.\" As proof, the politicians\' flirting with bloggers for
their ability to circulate information but also to resonate in the
traditional media (the old-fashioned fourth power). Thierry Crouzet is
less interested in institutional politics than in the Greek polis, the
ability to debate and organize, like farmers who exchange their seeds.
How can we describe this fifth power with its blurred contours?
Tocqueville or Subcomandante Marcos are summoned as epigraphs. But it is
Tolstoy\'s War and Peace that constitutes the audacious foundation of
the argument. The Battle of Borodino, which pitted Napoleon against
General Kutuzov on September 7, 1812, saw the death of 70,000 men and
had no real winner. Adopting Tolstoy\'s perspective allows Crouzet to
show that there are no heroes. \"Tolstoy had anticipated the theory of
networks and that each of the links contributed to the whole.\" The
Internet is no more controllable than a battlefield. \"Citizens \[\...\]
no longer need a party to unite.\" Unlikely alliances are born (alter
and liberals), individuals join forces anonymously and for free, as in
the collaborative online encyclopedia project Wikipedia. Ultraliberal or
libertarian, Thierry Crouzet\'s political project borders on utopia, in
a decentralized and non-hierarchical but still virtual world. His idea:
an open source political program supported by a set of networks. We
would like to believe it. (1) blog.tcrouzet.com/

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1424

The \"client\" application of Second Life, the persistent online
universe that the characters create themselves, has just been filed
under a free license by its creators, the LindenLab company. Under these
barbaric terms, it is a first step that could, in time, lead Second Life
from a closed universe, and especially from a game, to a \"standard\" of
the Web. At the same time, it could also lead to a new economy: one
where you buy a virtual product, made by a real person, for your virtual
character or your virtual house, which is also your virtual store but
which constitutes your real income\... If we don\'t get lost, we can see
the revolution that is underway. All LindenLab needs to do now is to
also release the \"server\" application (which is used to centralize the
data) so that Second Life can develop itself, in the same way that the
Net was built. If everything is open source, free of rights, then the
\"standard\" will spread. Like a spider\'s web\... Reminder: Second
Life, a persistent virtual world in three dimensions, is a game in which
three million human beings control, with the tip of their mouse, a
virtual character (\"avatar\") and make him become an entrepreneur,
supermarket manager, designer, painter or porn star. This is not a
role-playing game, where the goal is to kill the most ogres in ten
minutes. Here, there is only a flat piece of land and the possibility of
creating anything and everything, selling it or giving it away. In
December, around thirty million real dollars were exchanged there. This
is one of the staggering figures of Second Life: from the moment when
everyone can create objects, houses, land, clothes, they are bought or
given away. With real money. But all this is only the beginning. Second
Life is not destined to remain a game, a parallel world; it is destined
to be your next way of using the Internet. If Second Life ever became
what it can become (the new standard of the Web), the invisible entity
that is the Internet user would become a character (\"avatar\") in three
dimensions; and, instead of visiting pages by typing their URL address,
he would navigate geographically in a virtual world, each website having
become a house, a building, a café, a supermarket, a gallery, depending
on the intended use. Let us not be mistaken: the fact is that this mode
of navigation brings together all the tools that the Web currently uses
and offers: direct communication (instant messaging, which becomes more
fun and more open to encounters in 3D), information (each house contains
documents, as on a website), and any other service that the Web offers
today, including commerce. Of course, one can teleport to a place by
typing a simple address, so one would not lose speed. Navigation would
also be revolutionized in another way: people on the same site would
\"see\" each other and could react directly to information, as if a chat
window or forum were instantly registered on every location on the Web.
In addition to no longer being an invisible entity, the Internet user
would no longer be an anonymous entity: as is done with certain
applications, each Internet user would be located, and their path
traced\... for better (their friends) and for worse (malicious
institutions). But all this may be just a gadget compared to the rest.
The economy newly created by Second Life is a revolution. Even if the
most cautious were frightened by the appearance of the Internet, it has
always been a tool for communication and transaction; you access
information more quickly, you buy shoes that are sent to you by post,
you chat with friends as if on the phone, you send e-mails as if they
were letters, only faster. All this was true\... until the advent of
persistent virtual worlds. Also, remember that your virtual home would
be your business site, your personal site, your blog, and, moreover, a
place where your friends, clients or strangers could come to see you,
chat or exchange objects. This is exactly what happens in Second Life:
people come to your home because they know you, or because you have a
window with beautiful objects for sale, or because a neon sign announces
that you are a designer! They ring the doorbell, chat, trade. Many
people have a job, a store; many are looking for one. From a commercial
point of view, objects, to sell, buy or give, copy, etc., are thus of
three kinds. They can decorate one\'s home, which is the same as
decorating one\'s website: buying a painting made by an Internet user is
equivalent to buying an image from a person to put on their site. Buying
hairstyles or clothes is intended to enhance one\'s avatar, something
that is purely fun. Finally, and this is the biggest new thing, the last
type of purchase: enjoying a virtual service. Many characters in Second
Life, for example, offer themselves the services of a geisha for the
evening. And what is important in Second Life is that there are no
\"bots\", fake characters generated by the program; thus, virtual
services are necessarily performed by characters embodying real people.
And for real dollars. This is how a new economy is created\... We are
not talking here about Web 2.0, which will be only a gadget compared to
what is being prepared, and which is already underway. Thirty million
dollars were exchanged in December in Second Life by its three million
users; and this, in a currency, the \"L\$\", Linden Dollar, which will
inevitably have an international rate that should not be neglected in
the long term. And this while the universe is still closed, all servers
being managed by LindenLab, since the \"server\" software has not yet
been released. When it is, the propagation of this new standard will be
comparable to that of the Web. The playful side of 3D, the individuality
offered by the avatar and the personal house, the ease that proximity in
3D provides for discussing and meeting people will make the Internet
quickly become like this. All the good and bad sociological and
psychological points of this evolution of the Internet user, of our
relationships with others, with reality, with property and with work
remain to be observed. But let us not be mistaken. Second Life is not a
game; it is not surprising because of the eccentricities of its current
users; it is not destabilizing because of its demographic and financial
size; it is destabilizing because of the revolutions it can create on
the Internet and the economy.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1425

Microsoft, symbol of computer imperialism, which wants to pay an
Australian blogger to intervene on Wikipedia, a free, open and
collaborative online encyclopedia: this sounds like a caricature of a
digital scandal. However, this is the story that Rick Jelliffe told on
his blog on Monday. Microsoft apparently contacted him by email: \"They
wanted to secure the services of someone independent and friendly (me)
for two days, to provide more objective information on Wikipedia about
ODF and OOXML.\" The two acronyms are in fact at the origin of one of
those battles of specialists that computer scientists have the secret.
\"I think I will accept,\" adds Jelliffe. On the occasion of the release
of the new version of Office (Word, Excel, etc.), Microsoft has in fact
developed a standard (OOXML) which directly competes with its free
equivalent (ODF). Enough to fuel the guerrilla warfare that has long
pitted the proponents of free software against the followers of
proprietary computing. And Wikipedia, whose articles can be modified by
users, is an ideal terrain for this kind of skirmish. Microsoft regrets
the approximations and errors that, according to it, pepper the various
articles. And has therefore tried to call on an independent specialist
to remedy them. Which is absolutely contrary to the Wikipedia charter.
Because, even if Rick Jelliffe is an independent specialist, even if
Microsoft has not asked for any proofreading, and even if the errors on
Wikipedia are proven, paying a contributor on a specific subject is
incompatible with the neutrality of the point of view, a founding
principle of the encyclopedia. Jimmy Wales, co-founder of Wikipedia,
declared himself \"disappointed to hear that Microsoft was adopting this
approach\". According to him, Microsoft, to correct the inaccuracies,
should have produced a document on an external web page, then reported
on the pages reserved for discussions on the articles. We can, however,
think that it would have been simpler for the American firm to directly
ask one of its employees to modify, under a pseudonym, the pages in
question. Between an infamous scandal and a big blunder, we are
therefore leaning more towards the second interpretation.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1426

COMMUNICATOR. Nokia is launching a new Internet tablet, the N800.
Equipped with a high-resolution screen with a virtual touch keyboard,
this multifunctional device, compatible with Wi-Fi and Bluetooth, can be
used to make Internet calls, communicate via instant messaging and
exchange e-mail. As a bonus, it is a digital camera, audio and
multimedia player. Developed on a Linux system, the N 800 tablet can be
enhanced with new applications from the world of free software. 399 eur.
COMMUNITY. MySpace is launching the French version of the leading
community portal in the United States, which claims 140 million members
worldwide. Created in 2003 and acquired by Fox Interactive Media
(NewsCorp) in 2005, this service allows you to open a personal page for
free, share images, videos and audio documents, and exchange points of
view with other members. So far in test version, the site would record
650,000 user profiles in France. STORAGE. More than 50 GB on a single
disk! This is what the new blu-ray burner launched by LaCie allows.
Compatible with Mac and Windows, it connects by USB or Firewire and can
read, record and erase data on recordable blu-ray disks and on
recordable DVDs and CDs. 1,139 eur.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1427

NEUF CEGETEL WHILE Internet \"boxes\" are at the heart of the fierce
battle between telecommunications operators, Neuf Cegetel announced
yesterday the launch of its new Neuf Box. Benefiting from a less austere
design than the previous one, and designed with sustainable development
in mind, the latest Neuf Box \"offers the most advanced technical
features while being accessible to the most novice users\", says Michel
Paulin, CEO of Neuf Cegetel. In short, it is entirely Wi-Fi (i.e.
wireless) and allows simultaneous use of all the multimedia equipment in
the home. For example, a printer connected to the new Neuf Box can be
shared by all the personal computers in the home. In addition, it will
be able to benefit from contributions from the free software community.
Above all, the new Neuf Box is designed to operate on future fiber optic
networks as soon as they become available. All the major operators, from
Neuf Cegetel, which has just bought the company Médiafibre, to Free and
France Télécom, are investing in these networks of the future that will
offer consumers ever-increasing speeds. \"Scalability\" \"This
scalability gives us a real advantage in terms of cost over our
competitors, because we will not have to reinstall new boxes when very
high speed arrives,\" says Michel Paulin. Assembled in China, this new
box is developed in France for all its software. It will be offered free
of charge to all new customers subscribing to a \"100% Neuf Box\" offer,
those who no longer pay a subscription to France Télécom. From February,
existing customers will be able to order it for 49 euros. \"The box is
really one of the key technological factors differentiating between
market players,\" explains Michel Paulin. It allows us to demonstrate to
our customers on a daily basis our mastery of simplicity and ergonomics
combined with the best of technology.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1428

1\. K3 MP3 player takes on iPod Samsung\'s MP3 player, called the K3,
looks like Apple\'s iPod nano. Ultra-thin, unlike Microsoft\'s heavy and
very thick Zune, this MP3 music player has a button for listening to
live radio. The South Korean group\'s MP3 player has a built-in wireless
connection (Bluetooth) and can be plugged into a speaker to listen to
music at home or share it with friends. The previous device in this
family, the K5, launched in September, sold 300,000 units, with a tiny
stereo speaker. \"We have to expand demand. The market should be
saturated when it reaches 200 million MP3 players,\" reveals Dong Soo
Jun, general manager of Samsung\'s audio and video division. The group
hopes to launch its website in France, Germany and Great Britain at the
end of January, offered in cooperation with Musicnet. A competitor to
Apple\'s iTunes Music Store, this site will allow you to buy music. 2.
The card that replaces hard drives Creating even lighter and more secure
laptops. This is the goal of memory card manufacturer SanDisk, the world
leader in the sector ahead of Japan\'s Panasonic. The Californian
company has combined 16 small memory chips on the same card, controlled
by an electronic component. It has created a 4.5-centimeter-wide card
that replaces a hard drive, used to store information on a computer, but
which remains sensitive to shocks. Its storage capacity is 32 GB, half
that of an ordinary microcomputer. The price of this card, much higher
than that of a hard drive, and the names of the PC manufacturers that
will integrate it have not been revealed. But this innovation will make
it possible to reduce the size of microcomputers. SanDisk promises to
further increase storage capacity next year. 3. The almost universal DVD
player The South Korean group LG, which changed its president on January
1, is undermining the strategy of all its competitors. Its living room
player can read the two DVD formats of the future, HD DVD, offered by
Toshiba, and Blu-ray Disc, designed by Sony, Philips, Samsung and
Panasonic. LG is thus proposing to put an end to the war of standards.
But this device, which will be marketed in February in the United
States, is sold at a very high price (919 euros) which risks
discouraging many consumers. In addition, it is not capable of reading
classic DVDs. In order to remedy this problem, LG will offer in the
first quarter a universal player that connects to a PC, and which can
also burn CDs, DVDs and Blu-ray Discs. 4. A frame for digital photos For
a year, Philips has designed a frame for photos of family and friends.
Called \"PhotoFrame\", this electronic frame stores digital photographs.
All you have to do is connect it to a microcomputer. A photo appears on
the small flat LCD screen. With a simple press of a button, placed
behind the frame, the photo can be changed. The border of the frame can
be replaced, to adapt the color of the frame to the tones of the
photograph. This electronic device exists in two models, 18 cm and 23 cm
diagonal. Nokia had tried to market this type of frame for photographs
taken with its camera phones. But it was too early. 5. Nokia\'s N 800
competes with Apple\'s iPhone The N 800 is undoubtedly the most
innovative mobile phone of all the models presented by Nokia in Las
Vegas. It includes a small tablet, with a touch screen, designed to
connect to the Internet. It allows you to use Skype software, the new
Yahoo! Go service and Google programs such as Gmail Talk. Unlike the
iPhone, Apple\'s first mobile phone, the N 800 can connect to
third-generation networks (UMTS). Its operating system is the free
software Linux. Its Internet browser is Opera. This mobile allows you to
watch and take videos that can then be watched on a television. This
immediately available device is sold for 400 euros (excluding taxes),
excluding operator subsidies. 6. A PC that is always connected While
extolling the merits of Vista, Microsoft\'s operating system whose
consumer version is coming out at the end of the month, Bill Gates, the
founder of the software empire, also presented the Toshiba Portégé R
400. This 1.7 kg laptop allows you to be connected to the Internet at
all times thanks to an HSDPA card (for the advanced version of 3G) and
Wi-Fi. Its flat screen, backlit by diodes, improves viewing comfort. Its
announced battery life is 8 hours. This microcomputer will be marketed
in the spring, or a little later. Everything depends on the availability
of a new Intel chip, called Santa Rosa. 7. A low-energy phone Reducing
energy consumption has become a major issue for all manufacturers of
electronic devices. Motorola has put this strategy into practice for its
Motofone, a mobile phone that is only used for making calls. Made of a
single block, this device is equipped with a special screen that gives
the impression that it is a toy or a fake mobile phone. The traditional
screen of mobile phones is replaced by a monochrome screen made of
electronic ink. It consumes very little energy. Its standby time is 5
days and more than 7 hours of talk time. The Motofone was first marketed
in India last summer. It is very light (68 grams) and very thin (less
than a centimeter thick). 8. The Moto ACTV S9 Bluetooth headset These
headphones are shaped like a headband. This accessory, available in
black and red, is all the more futuristic because it works wirelessly. A
Bluetooth connection connects it to the mobile phone. The left earpiece
is used, by touching it, to adjust the volume; the right one to take a
phone call. 9. The TV that lets you watch videos on the Internet Sony\'s
BraviaS LCD TVs will be able to connect to the Internet and thus allow
you to watch videos on demand. Americans will be the first to discover
them in July. Consumers will have to buy a small box, sold separately by
the Japanese group, called \"Internet Video Link\". It is connected to
the set by a high-definition connection (called HDMI by experts). The
sale price of this device has not been set. Families will be able to
watch videos for free provided they have a broadband subscription with
AOL, Yahoo! or Grouper. The agreement is expected to be extended to
other Internet service providers. The menu for accessing the Internet
and services from your television is the same as that designed by Sony
for its latest video game consoles, the PlayStation Portable and the PS
3. The TV remote control serves as a mouse to navigate the Web and
access the content offered by the Tokyo firm. 10. The world\'s largest
flat-screen TV Sharp\'s president, Toshihiko Fujimoto, personally
unveiled the world\'s largest flat-screen TV with a diagonal of 108
inches (2.74 meters). \"This means that liquid crystals can create
larger screens than plasma screens,\" he explained. Long the world\'s
leading manufacturer of LCD flat screens, which it began producing
thirty-four years ago, Sharp has been overtaken by other Asian groups.
The previous record was held by Panasonic (Matsushita) with a plasma
screen with a diagonal of 103 inches, 2.5 centimeters ahead of a
television from South Korea\'s LG. The other major South Korean
manufacturer, Samsung, held the previous record, with a 102-inch LCD
screen. This feat was made possible by the start of production last
August of a new Sharp factory, the most modern in the world, based in
Kameyana (Japan). It is manufacturing a new device that is expected to
be launched this summer. Its selling price is expected to exceed 100,000
euros per unit.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1429

On the Saclay plateau (Essonne), in the greater Parisian suburbs, world
stars of mathematics and computer science, some working for a French
public research organization, the National Institute for Research in
Computer Science and Automation (Inria), and others for Microsoft, will
now rub shoulders. The joint research center between Inria and the world
number one in software was inaugurated on Thursday, January 11. It is
directed by Jean-Jacques Lévy, research director at Inria. Thirty
researchers, including doctoral students, post-docs and engineers, are
already collaborating there. There should eventually be around a hundred
of them working on fundamental research subjects, the results of which
could take around ten years before being applied in industry. The two
partners are providing equivalent resources. \"Microsoft will second
fewer researchers, but more money. Inria will invest more in
infrastructure and the support of non-permanent researchers,\" explains
Michel Cosnard, CEO of Inria. The budget will amount to a few million
euros per year. Not to mention the salaries: those of Microsoft
employees are much higher than those of Inria. \"We would never have
been able to afford Leslie Lamport,\" rejoices Mr. Cosnard. This
American computer scientist, a researcher at the Microsoft laboratory in
Mountain View (United States), founder of the theory of distributed
systems, which allows several computers to execute the same task
simultaneously, will be the head of one of the research teams. Georges
Gonthier, a Frenchman, former researcher at Inria, now employed by
Microsoft Research in Cambridge (England), and Benjamin Werner, a
researcher at Inria, both well-known in the community of computer
scientists for having demonstrated the four-color theorem, are also
joining the center to lead a project there. The results will belong
equally to the two partners. The discoveries will be the subject of
publications, as is customary in the scientific community, to be made
available to everyone free of charge. The software designed will be
distributed as \"open source\", i.e. free of rights. OPEN TO OTHER
COLLABORATIONS Inria has already set up partnerships of this type with
other companies: France Télécom, Alcatel, Thales, and in the past Bull.
Many start-ups have emerged from them, including Trusted Logic and
Kelkoo. On the other hand, this agreement is a first for Microsoft. Bill
Gates\' group already works with public or private research teams. But
it has never before participated in a project on a joint basis. The
historical relations established between Inria and Microsoft for many
years, under the aegis of Gilles Kahn, the previous CEO of Inria, who
died in February 2006, are at the origin of this. Inria\'s reputation
also weighed heavily in the balance. This organization is the only
European one, along with the Zurich Polytechnic, to appear in the world
ranking of the twenty best research centers in computer science, public
or private, produced by Thomson Scientific. This ranking is established
based on the number of times the researchers\' publications are cited by
others. \"This new research center is a pilot,\" says Eric Boustouller,
CEO of Microsoft France, \"which plans to intensify collaborations with
other research establishments. Microsoft funds chairs elsewhere in the
world. We are thinking about it in France, with Polytechnique, in
particular. The Joint Center for Fundamental Research created with Inria
will be one point of the network that we will put in place.\" The center
will be very open to other collaborations, insists both Inria and
Microsoft. Located in the System@tic competitiveness cluster area, it
will also be part of the Digiteo advanced research thematic network
(RTRA), which, in addition to Inria, brings together laboratories from
the Atomic Energy Commission (CEA), the CNRS, the Ecole Polytechnique,
the Ecole Supérieure d\'Electricité and the University of Paris-XI
(Orsay).

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1430

After Cambridge in the United Kingdom, Beijing in China and Bangalore in
India, Microsoft inaugurated yesterday, in the suburbs of Paris, its
fourth research center outside the United States. A major world first
according to the multinational and Inria (National Institute for
Research in Computer Science and Automation), the French co-founder of
the center, since never before had Microsoft committed to a 50-50
partnership, especially with a 100% public organization. \"A major
victory.\" This laboratory, the idea of which comes from Gilles Kahn
(the now deceased former president of Inria who had sold the idea to
Bill Gates), will allow around thirty researchers from Inria and
Microsoft Research to work on joint programs over the next five years.
An investment of 10 to 15 million euros for Microsoft, quite modest
compared to the two billion euros in turnover achieved annually in
France by the software publisher, but which makes the American the first
private partner of Inria 160 million euros of annual budget of which 20%
of own resources. \"Microsoft is not a patron, insisted Michel Cosnard,
president of Inria, this agreement is a great victory and will allow us
to have resources and especially to offer researchers attractive
conditions.\" Orsay special envoy The center will give in to research
\"very upstream and in the long term\", according to the two married. It
will dig in two directions: formal methods, which aim to advance
software design by using mathematics, and the development of computer
tools for science. Heavy. A more delicate point, it is planned that the
results of the research will give rise to a common intellectual
property. Inria and Microsoft Research will have to agree to exploit it.
\"This will be done on a case-by-case basis,\" reassures Michel Cosnard,
\"in exactly the same way as for other partnerships.\" Researchers will
have complete freedom in their work and the publication of their work,
they promise. Microsoft will be able to use the research results for its
software and they can also be sold to third parties under license. \"I
don\'t mind teaming up with people from Microsoft,\" explains
Pierre-Malo Denielou, 24, a PhD student and the youngest member of the
lab, \"the important thing is to work to advance science.\" A profitable
operation. Others, like free software activist Bernard Lang, research
director at Inria and staff representative on the board of directors,
are more critical. \"It\'s a good agreement for research but it\'s not
without risk,\" he says. \"Microsoft may take advantage of it to
increase its lead in certain areas and poach the best.\" Fears that make
Rick Rashid, the big boss of research at Microsoft, laugh. \"When I go
to China, people say to me: but what will you gain from co-financing
basic research? I answer that it benefits Microsoft as it benefits
everyone.\" In terms of image, the operation is in any case very
profitable.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1431

The information and communications technology (ICT) sector is back on
track. Global growth for 2006 was 6%. Quebec is following the trend, but
in our country, it is more pronounced in the multimedia sector. This is
understandable, since over the past three years, the Quebec video game
industry has grown from 30 to 70 companies and has reached 9,000
workers. All sectors combined, the ICT industry employs 140,000 people
in Quebec. And job offers have tripled since the stock market crash of
2001. The only downside is that experienced candidates are hard to find.
There is a shortage on the horizon. Université Laval received only 600
registrations in computer science for the 2006-2007 academic year,
whereas it received at least 1,000 five years earlier. Entrepreneurs are
worried. The shortage of labour is indeed one of the industry\'s major
concerns, says Jean-François Dumais, an analyst at TechnoCompétences, an
employment support organization. Also, promoting careers in ICT is on
the agenda in 2007. However, in this field as in others, the capital has
shown initiative. Putting aside their rivalries, 10 multimedia companies
launched www.macarriere enjeux.com in early November, a website that
provides information on careers in IT and multimedia and how to get
there. Also with a view to gaining visibility, the same group joined the
International Game Developers Association (IGDA) last August and opened
a chapter in Quebec City. Université Laval has also contributed to the
advancement of ICT by creating the Institut des technologies de
l\'information et des sociétés (ITIS). The organization has just
published its first IT report on Quebec, where we can read that the
technology industry has scored points in particular thanks to the rise
of the Internet, laptops, the rise of free software and digital storage.
Quebec-style success Thanks to technology, Quebec companies stood out in
2006. This is the case of Exfo, - a specialist in optical fiber - which,
in early September, launched its FiberFinder technology, a world first,
capable of identifying the \"right\" fiber in an optical network. A
major innovation for telecom companies, often faced with network outages
attributable to human error. Here, we are talking about considerable
savings in time and money. On the software side, Coveo Solutions,
unknown two years ago, is now competing with the giants thanks to its
Coveo Enterprise Search (CES) software, which has proven its ability to
perform a unified and secure search for multimedia content. Result: in
2006, Coveo increased its sales by 400%. Copernic, famous for its
metasearch engines, had the brilliant idea of creating a targeted search
tool for YouTube. But the most spectacular coup belongs to Industries
Rive-Sud, renamed Meubles Rive-Sud, which chose the Web route to
modernize. A success! Today, a supplier to Wal-Mart, Meubles Rive Sud
continues to manufacture furniture in Quebec, while providing 850 jobs
in Sainte-Croix-de-Lotbinière. What should we expect for 2007? Daniel
Girard, owner of CTRL and president of Vétiq - the voice of Quebec
entrepreneurs - maintains that the expansion of wireless will change the
business practices of its members. Today, in IT, expertise counts as
much if not more than technology, he says. So we have to adapt. This is
a dynamic that benefits customers, who are free to look elsewhere when
the formula does not suit them. The imminent end of employment tax
credits granted to companies located in centres of excellence such as
the Centre national des nouvelles technologies de Québec (CNNTQ)
concerns him. According to him, if the credits are cut without any other
form of support, dozens of SMEs risk disappearing. This is why
discussions are underway with the various levels of government to
mitigate the measure. Finally, 2007 will be marked by the seal of
marketing. A difficult sector for many Quebec companies, which, while
having mature products, do not have the marketing team to sell them.
\"This is our hobby horse for the months to come,\" warns Mr. Girard.
Quebec products should not remain a secret, due to a lack of means to
bring them to market. In the region, the ICT sector represents a
turnover of \$1.8 billion and some 14,000 jobs, concludes Mr. Girard.
lfournier@lesoleil.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1432

\- On November 21, Google\'s stock reached \$500 US. It was \$85 when it
debuted on the NASDAQ Stock Exchange in 2004. - The Internet had more
than 110 million registered names at the end of the year. The increase
was 7% over the last four months. - Since August, the gaming industry in
the greater Quebec City area has been part of the International Game
Developers Association (IGDA). - The future of the electronic
encyclopedia Wikipedia is compromised. One of its founders wants to
reinvent the formula. - YouTube.com - the Internet paradise of video -
is all the rage. Laval University has even put its new corporate stripe
there. - Free software is gaining popularity. It has broken Microsoft\'s
monopoly and, in doing so, has rebalanced the market. - Laval University
marks a first in Quebec with its completely distance learning computer
science degree. - Internet radio works. In the spring of 2006, Jeff
Fillion launched RadioPirate.com at \$6.99/month. - E-paper is on the
horizon. Les Échos de France is testing a portable and foldable
electronic version of its newspaper. - The electronic puppet theater is
coming. The LANTISS research group at Laval University is working hard
on it. - The podcast phenomenon, a super seller among young people,
could soon invade classrooms. - India is becoming a threat to IT, as
more and more research and development is being transferred there.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1433

WWW.GEOPORTAIL.FR, WWW.GEOCATALOGUE.FR LAST JUNE, at the Élysée and the
Ministry of Equipment, the Director General of the IGN (National
Geographic Institute) presented the Géoportail as the French equivalent
of Google Earth. In doing so, Bertrand Lévy gave it considerable
visibility. Indeed, a great many French people went to the site to
search for their town, their house or their building on aerial photos.
The influx of visitors was such that the site www.geoportail.fr was
unavailable for several days. But, by adopting this perspective, the
institute completely eclipsed its hidden face, the Géocatalogue and its
geographic data. The general project of the Géoportail is, in fact, much
more \"serious\" than that of Google Earth which should allow to \"fly
over the planet like Superman\", according to the expression of Chikai
Osahama, its manager at Google (1). It aims to gather public geographic
data (cadastre, risk zones, urban planning, infrastructure networks,
etc.) on a website and to be able to visualize them on aerial images or
base maps, in this case those of the IGN. An important project when we
know that nearly 80% of political, economic or private decisions are
based, directly or indirectly, on geographic information. For the DGME
(General Directorate for the Modernization of the State, attached to the
Ministry of the Budget), project owner of the Géoportail, there is no
ambiguity. \"The Géocatalogue is at the heart of the Géoportail
approach,\" says Clément Jaquemet, who has been leading the project
since 2005. The structure of the Géoportail is two-headed with two
project managers. The IGN provides the visualization tool for the
national territory with its aerial photos and maps on the geoportail.fr
site, all costs being borne by it. The BRGM (Bureau de recherches
géologiques et minières) is responsible for providing access to the
description of all digital data provided by the various public
stakeholders from the geocatalogue.fr site. The cost, estimated by the
BRGM at between 1.5 and 2 million euros over five years, is covered by
the State, with the DGME having set aside 705,000 euros for 2006-2007.
Search engine This dual design is detrimental to the readability of the
site. The first Internet user who comes along will quickly experience
this to their cost. The Géocatalogue can be accessed either directly via
the www.geocatalogue.fr site or via the geoportail.fr site, but in this
case, the path leading to it is difficult to find (click on search).
Furthermore, it is not yet possible to view Géocatalogue data on IGN
images. It should be in 2007. And yet, the data can already be viewed on
other sites such as NASA\'s World Wind virtual globe or with geographic
information software. The DGME assures that the site is to be constantly
improved and that the Géocatalogue section is primarily intended for
geographic information professionals. The BRGM is aware of the
difficulties. The Géocatalogue site opened on November 13. For the time
being, among the major data producers, only the BRGM, the IGN and the
project\'s partner ministries (Ecology, Agriculture and Equipment) are
present. In the future, the Géocatalogue could reference all geographic
data produced by ministries, public bodies or local authorities. The
stakes are high, now that all geographic information is digitized.
\"Immediately after the September 11 attacks, emergency services
encountered many difficulties in intervening because the maps from the
different services could not be directly used in the same repository,\"
says Jean-Marc Trouillard of BRGM, for example. Referencing the
Géocatalogue does not imply any modification of the data, which remains
under the control of the producers in their original IT environment. The
latter are strongly encouraged to join by the DGME but are in no way
obliged to do so. Also designed as a search engine, the Géocatalogue
should constitute \"the broadest possible entry point for searching for
the main geographic data of the State, knowing their characteristics and
the means of accessing them and viewing them in the Géoportail,\"
according to the project charter. Joining the Géocatalogue does not
require adopting a common IT language but leads to providing a
descriptive sheet of its technical data - the metadata - in order to
make them visible to all Internet users. The administration should also
soon make available free software (Géosource) to facilitate this
operation. \"Computing produces a great deal of heterogeneity but, at
the same time, it allows exchanges between different systems,\" explains
François Robida, who represents the BRGM within the Open Geospatial
Consortium. This international organization, bringing together 300
private and public organizations, seeks to promote \"the development of
open systems, norms and standards\" for everything related to geographic
information. Reluctance Beyond the technical aspects, the issue of the
Géocatalogue is political. \"We cannot continue to live in our Gallic
village,\" notes Francis Bertrand, of the BRGM. While we can predict
that administrations, ministries and public organizations will play the
game, the matter is far from won with local authorities. At the last
congress of mayors of France, several of their representatives
considered that the creation of the Géoportail revealed, in their eyes,
too strong a hold of the State. Those who have made a big effort to be
more visible on the Internet also fear that they will no longer be able
to control their communication by joining the Géoportail. The
possibility of viewing data on aerial photos or IGN base maps via the
Géoportail also arouses reluctance. The institute is, in fact, poorly
perceived by local authorities, who accuse it of selling its public data
at prohibitive prices. In this case, we arrive at a paradox: \"The State
seems more liberal than its communities\", notes Françoise de Blomac,
editor-in-chief of SIG la Lettre. (1) SIG la Lettre, September 2006.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1434

THE Wikipedia PROJECT has its roots in the free software movement.
Symbol of this affiliation, the user license that governs the operation
of this free encyclopedia: this contract is the equivalent, adapted to
the production of texts, of the GNU/GPL (General Public License) license
to which the Linux operating system, an alternative system to Windows,
is subject, for example. When adding a text to Wikipedia, the Internet
user assures \"everyone the effective freedom to copy or redistribute
it, with or without modifications, commercially or not\". He also
accepts that his text can be modified, provided that the modifications
made are subject to the same conditions as the initial content:
possibility of copying it, redistributing it, modifying it. This is the
principle of \"copyleft\" - a play on words made from American
copyright. In short, it is legal to copy an article from the free
encyclopedia and put it online on another site, without being forced to
pay reproduction rights. It would even be theoretically possible to sell
printed copies of Wikipedia, provided that these copies can be freely
copied and distributed for free, or not\... Other contracts for the use
of digital content are developed in the same spirit by Creative Commons,
an American non-profit organization founded in 2002 by Lawrence Lessig,
professor of law at Stanford University. Creative Commons has developed
six contracts in proper legal form that allow the production of content
that can be copied, exploited or not commercially, modified or not,
provided that the modifications are subject to the same conditions as
the original content. \"Around the world, around fifty institutions -
universities, research centers, law firms or associations - are now
affiliated with Creative Commons and transpose these contracts into
their national law,\" explains Mélanie Dulong de Rosnay, legal manager
of the project in France at the Center for Study and Research in
Administrative Sciences (CNRS/Université Paris-II).

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1435

West coast of Florida, on the eve of the year 2000. Jimmy Wales, 34,
leads a hectic life as a stockbroker and owner of the Bomis.com website,
a search engine that hosts entertainment content, including erotic
photos. But he wants to create the encyclopedia of the new millennium,
on the Internet: \"I was impressed by the \"software\" movement based on
volunteering, mutual aid and knowledge sharing, which has produced the
best software in the world. I wanted to extend this concept beyond
computers, and create a general encyclopedia, free and open to all,
produced collectively by interested Internet users.\" Jimmy Wales sets
out \"non-negotiable\" principles: the obligation to write articles in
accordance with the rule of \"neutrality of point of view\" to eliminate
militant or biased texts. Nupedia, his project, attracts two
programmers; he hired an editor-in-chief, Larry Sanger, 31, a doctor of
philosophy. The encyclopedia was hosted on Bomis\' servers. A year
later, Nupedia had still not taken off. Internet users who sent
contributions were rare, and the process of validating texts by groups
of experts was slow and complex. Wales and Sanger therefore created a
second site operating thanks to a new software that was freely available
and popular on the Net, the Wiki (\"quickly\", in Hawaiian). Unlike
traditional sites, a Wiki could be modified at any time and at will by
its visitors: the ideal tool for working together. The success of this
site, called Wikipedia, was immediate: thousands of teams began to
collectively write articles on all subjects, from the most serious to
the most trivial. The texts were constantly corrected, rewritten or
enriched by enthusiastic volunteers. There were countless frictions
between authors, and incessant conflicts, but the encyclopedia took
shape. Foreign language versions were born on all continents. In 2002,
Nupedia was abandoned in favor of Wikipedia, which Jimmy Wales proudly
called \"an absolute mess.\" Larry Sanger, faithful to the principle of
a classic encyclopedia run by recognized specialists, left the project
and launched several sites rivaling Wikipedia. To date, without success.
A year later, the Bomis server was no longer sufficient to manage
Wikipedia\'s traffic, which was equipped with dedicated, and therefore
expensive, servers. Jimmy Wales appealed to Internet users: for the
project to remain free and independent, they had to send it donations.
To comply, Jimmy Wales created a non-profit Foundation called Wikimedia,
domiciled in Florida. Overseeing the encyclopedia and related projects,
it would own the equipment, funds and brand. Today, Wikipedia is a
world-renowned institution, which has established itself as a reference
and daily work tool for Internet users in all countries. And Jimmy Wales
has just announced, for 2007, the launch of a search engine, Search
Wikia, operating on the model of Wikipedia. The latter receives more
than 350 million visitors per month, which ranks it among the top ten
sites worldwide. 300 dedicated servers are installed in Florida,
Amsterdam and South Korea. The English version alone contains 1.5
million articles and is enriched by more than 1,000 articles per day.
Wikipedia exists in 249 languages - led by English, German and then
French. It still survives thanks to donations from individuals and
corporate sponsorship. While it was set at \$50,000 in 2004, its budget
should reach \$6 million in 2007. Over time, Wikipedia has adopted a
structure based on the balance and compartmentalization of powers. Some
of the most active \"Wikipedians\" are promoted by their peers to the
rank of \"administrator\" (they edit new articles, monitor changes,
identify poorly prepared novice authors or vandals). \"For the English
version, there are a thousand of them,\" explains Jimmy Wales. \"They
are indispensable. They do the boring work and provide logistical
support to the authors.\" There are also the \"bureaucrats\" who manage
small communities around a local project, the \"stewards\" who resolve
organizational and internal policing problems, the \"check-users\" who
track down troublemakers to ban them and the \"oversights\" who can go
as far as the archives to destroy a defamatory article\... For the most
acute conflicts, Jimmy Wales has created an arbitration committee of a
dozen members for the English version. Its decisions are final. Other
countries have imitated him, but not all: German Wikipedians submit
insoluble conflicts to a vote of the users. To operate this enormous
machine, the Foundation has only seven paid employees! Jimmy Wales
devotes himself to Wikipedia\'s public relations (conferences,
interviews, meetings with political, economic and scientific
leaders)\... He dreams of going to China, where Wikipedia is banned:
\"We have a very active Chinese version, thanks to Taiwan and Hong Kong,
and a few authors on the continent. But the authorities of the People\'s
Republic of China block our sites. I\'m going to go to Beijing to see
the officials, explain to them who we are, understand why they do
this.\" Wales also created Wikia, a commercial company that uses Wiki
software to build virtual entertainment communities on the major themes
of American popular culture. In September, he handed over the presidency
of the Foundation to Florence Devouard, a 38-year-old Frenchwoman who
lives near Clermont-Ferrand. An agricultural engineer with a passion for
computers, Ms. Devouard devotes herself entirely to her volunteer work
for Wikipedia. She discovered Wikipedia in 2002, as a simple user: \"I
was doing research on biosecurity; The websites were very biased.
Wikipedia provided masses of factual information, in a neutral way, and
mentioned the various opinions. I was won over, I started writing
articles.\" During the Iraq War, she discovered that American
Wikipedians published information that was very different from the
French media and undertook to provide them with another view of events.
Her role evolved: \"I started to talk with authors to teach them
neutrality of point of view, not to sort information in a partisan way,
to diversify their sources.\" She quickly established herself as a
mediator capable of finding compromises between authors of opposing
tendencies: \"I encourage them to talk to each other, to understand the
logic of the other. It\'s a constant battle, it\'s sometimes impossible,
for example with sects. But overall, it works.\" The new president has
set herself priorities: \"Wikipedia has grown very quickly, it\'s a
mess! We need to establish faster decision-making mechanisms and then
streamline financial management. Large IT companies have given us
packages of shares, which we will manage to generate revenue.\" She also
wants to strengthen Wikipedia\'s international aspect: \"The new board
has three Americans and four Europeans, which is important. We need to
open up to Africa, which represents less than 0.1% of our connections.\"
Ms. Devouard also wants to \"clean up\" the content: \"An unknown singer
writes an article about himself presenting himself as a big star,
providing his personal site as a source, this is not acceptable.\" For
her, Wikipedia must stop hosting a mass of \"insignificant\"
information, which relies on \"unreliable\" sources, such as blogs. On
the other hand, there is no question of going back on volunteering,
independence and free services: \"In the media, we are often associated
with Web 2.0, the new generation of start-ups, and some people imagine
that we are going to be bought by Google. They have not understood
anything: we are not for sale, we are an international charity, like the
Red Cross. \"Free\" is spreading, everyone will have to deal with it.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1436

The end of the year is a hangover for anti-liberal groups. The breakup
of the common front born on the left of the left after the \"no\" vote
in the referendum on the European Constitution Treaty leaves the field
open to Marie-George Buffet, general secretary of the PCF, who has
decided to launch herself into the presidential battle alone. What will
remain of this dynamited dynamic? The 125 proposals of the \"draft
program\", a sort of \"precious common heritage to open up a new
perspective on the left tomorrow, cannot be sold off\", the national
group now assures. Many themes were ultimately not developed, due to
lack of consensus (such as agriculture) or remain unfinished (such as
the passages relating to globalization, development or free software).
Nevertheless, there remains what the trade unionist Christophe Aguiton
calls \"a toolbox\", from which \"all groups can draw\". Starting with a
base of economic ideas. Libération has therefore decided to mention five
of them. And, in the absence of possible dialogue between the PCF and
the anti-liberal collectives, to submit them to two economists from the
Socialist Party: Jacques Généreux, advisor to Laurent Fabius, and Eric
Besson, MP for Drôme and national secretary for the economy and
taxation. Yves Salesse, president of the Copernic Foundation and former
candidate for the anti-liberal candidacy, one of the driving forces
behind the 125 proposals, responds for his part to the PS\'s responses.
If, on the substance, little diverges between the radical left and the
socialist left, the methods for achieving this are not a consensus. A
brief overview of the debates that, on the left, will not fail to
resurface during the presidential campaign. (1)
www.alternativeagauche2007.org 1. Working time: \"Immediately make the
generalization of the 35-hour week applicable to all companies with the
prospect of 32 hours, without loss of salary or worsening of flexibility
or working conditions.\" The Socialist Party\'s opinion: Jacques
Généreux: \"Of course, the 35-hour week must be generalized, even if it
means considering compensatory measures for SMEs. There is a debate
within the PS on the 32-hour week. Within the left wing, we think we
must go for it. Because labor productivity in France is one of the
highest in the world. Because reducing working hours reduces
absenteeism. Because it must allow for the creation of jobs, such as the
250,000 created with the 35-hour week.\" Eric Besson: \"The PS does not
have the 32-hour week as a perspective, even if, in the long term, no
subject is taboo. The generalization of the 35-hour week is in the PS\'s
program and it is even in the interest of SMEs not to have two-speed
companies. On the methods of application, we refer to social
negotiation. We would be criticized for giving the conclusions before it
takes place.\" Yves Salesse\'s response: \"Besson agrees on the
generalization of the 35-hour week: it\'s a shame that the PS didn\'t do
it when it had the opportunity. And we are opening up the prospect of
the 32-hour week for the reasons that Généreux gives.\" Public services:
\"Immediately, we will stop all privatization and all opening up of the
capital of public service companies. Public network services essential
for access to fundamental rights (energy, railways, telecoms, postal
activities, etc.) must be part of a national public service mission with
a return to the public monopoly when conditions make it possible.\" The
Socialist Party\'s opinion: JG: \"We agree. Knowing that control can
also be done by majority control of the State. Knowing also that the
return of the State must be imposed in certain delegations of public
services left to the private sector, as shown by the catastrophic
management of water in France, the Post Office in Sweden, electricity in
the United States or rail in Great Britain. Like the collectives, we
also think that new missions must be created for the public service,
such as early childhood. We can clearly see, in France, like the Post
Office, that productivity gains are reflected, for example, in a
desertification of staff at the counters in large cities and a closure
of offices in the countryside.\" EB: \"This is not the point on which
there can be the most divergence. We have made a \"freeze frame\" on
privatizations. We are very attached to maintaining large public
services, and we are introducing the idea of an energy center. On the
objectives, we agree. This also depends on France\'s ability to convince
on a European scale.\" Yves Salesse\'s response: \"Eric Besson does not
see any divergence. So much the better. He does not explain to us why
the left privatized and accepted European liberalizations. And for us it
is not a question of a \"freeze frame\" (before the film continues?) of
privatizations. The stop is essential, but not enough. We must go back
on previous privatizations, improve existing public services and create
new ones. In addition to the improvement in the standard of living that
this allows, public money thus ensures the creation of jobs that cannot
be relocated.\" Low wages: \"The minimum wage will be immediately
increased to 1500 euros gross and quickly to 1500 euros net \[\...\].
The indexation of wages on prices will be reestablished.\" The opinion
of the Socialist Party: JG: \"I agree on the principle, not necessarily
on the terms. Our plan is to reach 1500 euros (100 euros immediately)
during the legislature. The problem does not concern large companies
given their profit margins which are not used for productive investment
but SMEs. They need to be helped in the form of exemption by recovering
part of the 25 billion euros in aid. As for the indexation of salaries
on prices, proposed by the anti-liberals, it is\... rather timid! Such a
mechanism already exists de facto today and inflation is very low. The
real issue is the loss of purchasing power linked to the boom in housing
and transport prices, which cause an anti-wealth effect for the lowest
salaries without assets.\" EB: \"The minimum wage is not the only tool
by which the purchasing power of modest salaries must be addressed. We
must not outbid the minimum wage. It is easy to say that we are more
left-wing by asking for a higher minimum wage. We must find a balance
between purchasing power and the risks of relocations or company
departures.\" Yves Salesse\'s response: \"Salaries are not the only way
to improve the standard of living. We can also improve and develop
public services. But the inadequacy of low wages must be corrected
immediately. The public authorities do not control wage policy, but they
must act on the minimum wage. Eric Besson\'s objection on offshoring
does not hold. The wage gap with China or even Hungary is such that the
proposed increase does not change anything. The only thing left is the
difficulty for SMEs. Be careful: this objection leads to ruling out any
improvement in social conditions at the expense of companies. With such
reasoning, there would have been neither paid holidays nor Social
Security. In addition, the SME category is not relevant. Some are very
profitable, others only survive thanks to low wages and precariousness.
The latter would succumb to the first market shock on raw materials or
outlets. They must be helped by a credit policy from the public
financial center and a loosening of the grip on subcontracting. As for
indexation, Jacques Généreux himself answers his objection: the price
index must be revised so that it more accurately reflects the
situation.\" Stock market layoffs: \"Stock options will be eliminated
\[\...\]. Layoffs will be prohibited for companies that make profits.\"
The Socialist Party\'s opinion: JG: \"Stock options must be limited and
regulated. They can be used in one case only: to help develop new
companies and mobilize the human capital needed to take risks. But there
is no question of them inflating the income of senior executives in
large companies because they encourage stock prices to be boosted for
shareholders alone. A rise in prices that, perversely, involves stock
market layoffs. Wanting to prohibit these by law alone is complicated
and almost impossible for the courts to manage. On the other hand, we
need to multiply mixed interventions to limit them as much as possible:
by surtaxing up to 100% the stock market capital gains of firms that lay
off workers, by surtaxing profits via corporate tax, by vigorously
increasing severance pay for employees.\" EB: \"This is wishful
thinking, even if it corresponds to a real expectation. In the era of
the global economy and companies with subsidiaries everywhere, it is
easy to relocate profits. What to do? Give the administration the power
to audit a company\'s global profits? This is well-intentioned, but it
is inapplicable. We probably need to increase the costs of offshoring or
layoffs for economic reasons, discourage windfall effects, and be more
demanding on reindustrialization. But unless we leave the market
economy, which the PS is not proposing, it is inapplicable.\" Yves
Salesse\'s response: \"This measure is only intended to respond to the
most egregious cases. The new intervention powers of employees and
regional development commissions as well as the new status of employees
complete it. The increase in the cost of relocations or layoffs and the
penalizing surcharges can be part of the panoply. But they authorize
stock market layoffs for groups that can afford them, like the purchase
of pollution permits. Or else we tax at such a level that it amounts to
a ban. I don\'t see how this is unmanageable by the courts. The only
objection is that groups can organize the relocation of profits. We know
that. That does not mean giving up tax on profits, for example. And the
conclusion to be drawn is that the measure will eventually have to be
interpreted as a ban on layoffs in groups that make profits.\" ECB and
Stability Pact: \"Challenge the status of independence of the European
Central Bank (ECB) from all political control, transform its missions
and place it under parliamentary control, in order to reorient European
monetary policy \[\...\]. Challenging the Stability Pact that we will
not apply in any case if it hinders our action.\" The opinion of the
Socialist Party: JG: \"On this, I find the collectives, as on other
economic subjects, almost timid! Because yes, the Stability Pact hinders
our action! It must be challenged because it is stupid and \[it\]
prohibits fiscal and monetary political cooperation. In the past, the
left of the PS was mocked when it advocated abandoning the Pact and
reforming the statutes of the ECB. Today, within the European
socialists, a consensus is emerging to say that it must be reviewed. The
question remains, here again, how we go about it. And here again, if we
agree on most of the anti-liberals\' objectives, we can disagree on the
means of achieving them.\" EB: \"The question is not to call into
question the independence of the ECB. There must be a balance between
its autonomy and the existence of a democratic body with which there is
dialogue and cooperation for us, this would be the European economic
government. This involves introducing growth and employment into the
ECB\'s mandate, and not just inflation. This is already the case in
other countries, notably the United States.\" Yves Salesse\'s response:
\"Eric Besson is making proposals that were not in the draft European
constitution that he defended and which were not the subject of a battle
when the PS led the government. Is it a habit of only proposing things
once the opportunity has passed? Basically, we prefer control by
Parliament to the \"economic government\" that Jacques Delors has been
talking about for a long time and which has never seen the light of day
because governments never represent a united force capable of
counterbalancing the ECB. Généreux finds us timid. So much the better.
This is already a sign that we have not given in to the bidding war. We
say three things about the means of our European policy. We must carry
out work of conviction. And not limit ourselves to diplomatic
negotiation: we must conduct battles with all the forces that exist in
other countries and \[that\] want to challenge liberal policies. We must
block new regressions as the current institutional system allows.
Finally, we must refuse to apply what stifles political action. The
right here and Schröder in Germany did not apply the Stability Pact.
Without drama. The plural left did not dare.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1437

In the weekend edition, my colleague Paul Cauchon returned, in an
article entitled Internet, new mirror, to the crowning of millions of
Internet users by the American magazine Time, which last week awarded
them the title of personality of the year. People whose main quality is
to contribute, day after day, to the addition of content and knowledge
(for some) in the vast universe of the Internet. As in most analyses on
the subject, and I include mine at the beginning of the week on
Radio-Canada, we all talk about bloggers, \"Youtubers\" and people who
participate in the development of this great universal online
encyclopedia that is Wikipedia. But someone is missing in the portrait.
I am thinking here of this community of people who often invest dozens
if not hundreds of hours voluntarily for a cause, the free digital
world. That is to say, these tools that allow us to access, create,
learn and entertain ourselves freely on the Internet. Of course there
are Apple and Microsoft and their dozens of software programs that make
life easier for Internet users. But at the same time, there is this
community of \"developers\" here and elsewhere in the world who work to
create free tools that people are free to use often for free, to modify,
to redistribute to their friends and colleagues without stealing from
anyone and without having to ask permission. The world of free software
also has its share of impact on the evolution of the Internet. Without
necessarily having to use one of the many operating platforms of the
Linux family, millions of Internet users have embraced, in some cases
without even knowing it, the world of free software this year. I am
thinking of the millions of users of the Firefox browser, the
Thunderbird email software or the OpenOffice office suite. So
congratulations also to these thousands of people who work in the field
of free software and protocols who, through their work, have
participated in making the Internet bigger and more welcoming. To these
people, thank you, and especially congratulations on your title of Time
magazine\'s 2006 personality of the year! \*\*\* Last week, the French
General Commission on Terminology and Neology officially issued a notice
to Internet users and communicators strongly recommending that they no
longer use the term \"podcast\" and its derivatives, the theme
\"podcaster\" being an example of a derivative. The organization instead
suggests using the term \"diffusion pour baladeur\" to replace
\"podcast\" and \"diffuser pour baladeur\" for \"podcaster\". Seeing
this, we can only applaud the OQLF\'s initiative to have initiated the
use of the term baladodiffusion in our country a few years ago. The
French Commission on Terminology explains that the use of the terms
podcast and podcasting is a source of confusion because they are very
close to the name of Apple\'s iPod device. The organization also takes
the opportunity to point out that the iPod is actually a \"digital music
player\" and strongly encourages people to use this word to describe
these devices. Speaking of language, have you heard of \"Petit Bettina
Soulez\"? It is the initiative of a French blogger, communications
consultant and, above all, lover of the French language. She created a
lexicon of fictitious words related to the world of blogs. Take a moment
to read the definition of a few words. The full text can be found on the
website of French notebook writer Bettina Soulez
(http://aubonsens.typepad.com). - Blog: a space for creation and freedom
offered to everyone on the Internet. - Blogosphere: an environment in
which blogging is carried out. - Blogotomy: a surgical operation
attempting to separate the blogger from his keyboard, and therefore from
his blog. - Blogomania, blogomania: a strange habit or taste for
blogging that can irritate those around the blogger. - Blogomaniac: who
manifests an obsession with blogging. - Bloguesque: relating to
blogging. - Blogubuotesque: which appears ridiculous on a blog. -
Blogaillerie: blogged mockery. - Blogorrhea: speech disorder manifested
by an excess of words on the blog. Currently incurable disease leading
to exhaustion. - Blogologue: blogging specialist seeking to alleviate
the torments of the compulsive blogger. - Blogology: scientific study of
blogging facts. - Blogger: person who blogs, often misunderstood by
non-bloggers. - Blogasm: high point of blogging pleasure. - Bloguerie:
similar to a chat which, come autumn, could be had by the fireside\...
in France, Canada or Belgium. - Emblogué: said of a person embarked,
stuck or enlisted in a blogging current. - Désemblogué: said of a poor
blogger, lost outside the blogosphere. - Inéblogable: said of an
inimitable and incomparable blog. - Néoblogophyte: blogger recently
converted to the art of blogging. bguglielminetti@ledevoir.com
Contributor to Le Devoir Bruno Guglielminetti is a producer and new
technology columnist for Radio-Canada\'s Première chaîne. He is also the
editor of Carnet techno (www.radio-canada.ca/techno).

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1438

Major U.S. indices ended the session lower yesterday as investors took
profits ahead of the long Christmas weekend in a very quiet session. The
Dow Jones closed down 0.63% at 12,343.22 and the Nasdaq lost 0.61% to
2,401.18. Among the day\'s indicators, household consumption spending
rose 0.5% in November from October and household incomes increased 0.3%.
On the inflation front, the index measuring prices related to consumer
spending was flat in November, while analysts had expected a 0.2%
increase. Media group News Corp. fell 0.23% to \$21.53. Canadian
Research in Motion, maker of the BlackBerry, lost 2.77% to \$130.00.
Finally, the Red Hat group, one of the main distributors of free Linux
software, ended stable at 16.16 dollars, after the announcement of
quarterly results above expectations.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1439

Software startups are a new force. In the age of online teamwork, Zimbra
is taking on Microsoft with its low-cost e-mail software. In late 2003,
in a Palo Alto, Calif., diner, three friends tired of working for
Silicon Valley companies decided to design e-mail software. Over the
course of a weekend, they cobbled together a simple prototype. Then they
searched the Web for free software. Within months, they had assembled
more than 40 blocks of free programming into a basic system. They named
it Zimbra---after a Talking Heads song---put it online, and invited
suggestions from people on the Internet. Teamwork From a dorm room with
so many computers that the air conditioner runs even in the winter, a
young college student from Rochester, N.Y., has been poring over the
code to identify potential bugs. A Denver-area computer expert worked to
improve the software\'s anti-spam feature while watching episodes of
Lost on TV. And a nuclear engineer translated the software into French
from his chalet in the Alps. The employees were paid T-shirts and caps
for their pay. In February, the three men launched their product at a
discount, which quickly irked Microsoft\'s franchise, the market leader.
Like Microsoft\'s Exchange software, Zimbra lets office workers send,
receive, store and scan the thousands of e-mails their companies receive
each day. Today, about four million people use Zimbra. Alternatives
Zimbra is a speck of dust compared to Microsoft, which boasts that it
offers Exchange to 140 million users. But the specks of dust are
growing. The Web is full of alternatives to Microsoft, from the Firefox
browser to the SugarCRM sales software. Even Google has gotten into the
fray, buying up startups including a spreadsheet program and the small
maker of the free word-processing software Writely.com. Microsoft
Chairman Bill Gates says he has looked at Zimbra and admits \"they\'ve
done a good job.\" But he says the product \"doesn\'t come close to
offering all the benefits of Exchange.\" Exchange, the messaging
software of choice for thousands of large global companies, combines
conference calls with instant messaging. The latest version makes it
even easier to use the service using cell phones and other mobile
devices. But Exchange, despite its many features, is complicated and can
be more expensive than Zimbra because of a complex pricing structure.
Developing the latest version of Exchange took years of work by more
than 400 Microsoft employees. Big Changes The emergence of new companies
like Zimbra comes as Microsoft struggles to adapt to the big changes
brought by the Internet. The company built its wealth by dominating the
personal computer software market. But more and more of the basic tasks
once done by Microsoft software can be done on the Web - or on phones,
handheld computers and other devices that don\'t require Microsoft
software. That\'s forcing Microsoft to find ways to sell software as a
service on the Web while maintaining its stronghold in the computer
software industry. While Microsoft is still growing at a healthy rate in
both revenue and profit, it appears that its Windows operating system
and Office software, which grew by about 30 percent a year in the 1990s,
will never again be as successful as they once were. Microsoft\'s stock,
though up since last summer, has been flat for the past six years. Three
Friends Zimbra was the brainchild of three programmers led by Mr.
Dharmaraj. Mr. Dharmaraj befriended Ross Dargahi and Roland Schemers
while working at Sun Microsystems. The three joined forces in a software
startup in 1997 before resigning in 2003. Meeting at a pub in late 2003,
the three friends agreed that there was a need for a new enterprise
e-mail software that could serve business customers more simply and
cheaply than Exchange. They thought they could hastily build it by
rummaging through free software on the Web. The programmers had been
collaborating informally on the Web for decades. But in the early 1990s,
they coalesced into a grassroots movement known as \"open source.\"
Through this network, Dharmaraj and his team found software that they
worked to assemble into a single program. They added fancy features
called \"Zimlets,\" which let users perform tasks within an e-mail, such
as searching Amazon.com or getting a Yahoo map by hovering over a street
address. By the spring of 2004, the three partners had accumulated \$4
million in seed money. They spent it sparingly, housing their modest
contingent of 10 employees in a rented office in Silicon Valley. They
eventually raised a total of \$30.5 million in venture capital. In
August 2005, in keeping with the rites of passage of the open-source
world, Zimbra posted a prototype of its software on the Web and invited
suggestions.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1440

It is forbidden to practice the tied sale of a saucepan with pasta, so
why allow that of computers with software? It is to denounce this very
common method that the consumer association UFC-Que choisir sued
yesterday morning the PC manufacturer Hewlett-Packard and two
distributors, the Auchan store in Bagnolet (93) and the Darty des
Halles, in Paris. \"Free choice\". With a simple observation: it is
almost impossible today for a consumer to buy a computer without
acquiring at the same time an operating system, Microsoft Windows in the
vast majority of cases, and very often several other software
(antivirus, games, etc.). \"This is not an anti-Microsoft crusade,
indicates Julien Dourgnon, the head of studies at UFC. We are arguing
for free choice: it is still incredible that most consumers have never
paid a cent directly to Microsoft and that it is one of the richest
firms in the world.\" According to the association, 10% to 20% of the
price of a computer is due to pre-installed software, and it would be
desirable to let the consumer decide whether or not they want these
programs. This legal action echoes the campaign led for several years by
supporters of free software at war with \"racketeering\" and multiplying
letters to the fraud department to complain about not being able to buy
a \"bare\" computer or, at least, to be able to get a refund for the
software they do not want. \"Free software like Linux \[an operating
system competing with Windows, editor\'s note\] is now easy to install
and runs well, so there is no reason to force the sale of Windows,\"
believes Bernard Lang, president of the French Association of Free
Software Users (Aful), while recalling that tied sales practices
\"maintain Microsoft\'s monopoly.\" \"Trust.\" On the Hewlett-Packard
France side, the legal affairs director, Alain Spitzmuller, claims to
have \"confidence in justice\" and \"to act solely in the consumer\'s
interest\". According to him, this is in no way an illegal tied sale,
because \"this does not exist when there is a legitimate reason to link
two components. However, the computer and the software are not separate
products, because a computer without an operating system cannot
function\", and, according to him, the choice of Windows is essential
because \"Linux is still a specialist matter\".

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1441

Since the start of the 2003 school year, parents of children attending
the Pilâtre-de-Rozier secondary school in Ars-sur-Moselle (Moselle) have
been able to view their children\'s grades on the Internet, their
timetable, the list of homework they have to do, etc. All they have to
do is log in to a secure, personalized web portal using a username and
password. \"It\'s very practical for us families who are outside the
school,\" explains Eric Marion, head of the Federation of Parents\'
Councils (FCPE) for the secondary school. \"We can monitor our
children\'s schooling without waiting for their school reports, check
that a teacher is absent, and read teachers\' comments in real time.\"
Passionate about new technologies, Olivier Pallez, principal of the
secondary school from 2000 to 2006, is behind the implementation of what
is called a digital work environment (ENT). \"The initial objective was
to make students and their parents responsible for academic results,\"
he explains. To set up his project, he requested funding from the
college\'s recruiting municipalities and the Moselle department. This
small technological revolution has taken over national education in
recent years. Already, more than 9% of middle schools, 17% of general
and technological high schools, and 12% of vocational high schools have
made academic results available on the Web, as well as other information
such as timetables or student absences - systematically announced by
SMS. Faced with the emergence of disparate and more or less substantial
initiatives, the Ministry of National Education launched, in 2003, with
the Caisse des Dépôts, a call for projects from departments, regions and
academies to develop digital work environments. Objective: to harmonize
the different systems, offer access to a range of services from a single
portal and give a strong boost to the development of the Net in schools.
\"We have developed a series of common rules valid throughout France,\"
explains Benoît Sillard, delegate for Internet usage at the ministry.
\"We want 80% of middle and high schools to be equipped by 2010.\" To
date, there are approximately 200 middle and high schools equipped with
digital work environments that meet the ministry\'s recommendations.
These ENTs are developed at the initiative of 8 regions, 22 departments
and 14 academies. Lorraine is one of the pioneers. Ten school groups
(middle and high schools) are equipped with digital environments.
Generalization to the entire region remains an objective, but the
complexity of the project requires constant adjustments. \"In use, some
tools prove to be used more than others. The main education advisors
ultimately prefer to call the parents of absent students directly rather
than send a text message. On the other hand, discussion forums are very
popular,\" analyzes Pascal Faure, information and communication
technology advisor at the Nancy-Metz rectorate. The Ile-de-France region
has 12 pilot establishments equipped with ENT, including the
René-Auffray high school in Clichy (Hauts-de-Seine). \"It\'s a fabulous
tool,\" enthuses the high school principal, Jean-Pierre Vast. When I
receive parents in my office, I have access to all the grades and
assessments concerning their children instead of running after the
teachers.\" During class councils, Mr. Vast projects each student\'s
report cards and enters the teachers\' assessments directly into the
computer. The software also allows teachers to put educational documents
(lessons, maps, illustrations) online for students. Teachers can reserve
equipment online and communicate with their colleagues, students or
parents using the internal messaging system. Absent high school students
can consult the teachers\' notebook from home, which contains the
questions covered in each class as well as the homework to be done. They
can also chat with their classmates on a forum, do homework or exercises
online, alone or with others\... Frédéric Bonvoisin, a mathematics and
science teacher, was the driving force behind the operation. An
experiment was first launched in February on three classes before
expanding the ENT in September to all 1,600 students and staff. Teachers
benefited from short training sessions. The students did not need them.
\"Compared to us, they are at least a generation ahead,\" assures Mr.
Bonvoisin, who, on the other hand, regularly receives messages from his
colleagues in need of explanations. The Ile-de-France region, which is
currently testing the portals of four private companies, is trying to
develop a free software solution. \"This would allow you to be in
control of your product and your investments,\" they believe in the
region.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1442

More than 400 million cell phones in India, more than half a billion in
China, almost 100 million in Brazil Hasn\'t the \"cell\" become the
preferred communication tool for the youth and the new middle classes of
these immense emerging markets? Hasn\'t it even become the tool par
excellence for the consumption of audiovisual content? Many believe so.
However, many could soon change their minds: a laptop computer for more
or less \$100 is coming, designed essentially to be established in
developing countries. With the consequences that one can imagine.
Implemented at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, a humanitarian
project launched by the eminent Nicholas Negroponte (great theoretician
of the Web), One Laptop Per Child targets developing countries,
including Argentina, Brazil, Libya, Nigeria and Thailand. The very low
cost of this new laptop is due to the manufacturing processes of its
screen, the replacement of the hard drive with Flash memory and the
spectacular reduction in its energy consumption, 80% lower than that of
a normal laptop. According to the latest news, the price of the One
Laptop per Child project would be a little higher than expected, closer
to \$150, which is still revolutionary. Speaking to the New York Times a
few days ago, Nicholas Negroponte assured that his little machine would
fall below the \$100 mark by 2008. It is interesting to note that this
computer would not come with a Windows operating system. Instead, it
would feature \"open source\" applications, free as we know Linux, etc.
Which obviously does not suit software manufacturers, starting with
Microsoft and Intel. We know that the latter company has developed a
\$400 laptop intended for the school market based on a Windows operating
system. It weighs just over 1 kg and is about half the size of a regular
laptop. This has prompted Intel to also manufacture a laptop at a cost
comparable to that of the One Laptop per Child project, as has the
company Mobilis, which is promoting a similar project. Intel, for its
part, is trying to introduce its low-cost model in Brazil. The company
plans to provide a thousand of them free of charge to the Brazilian
government in order to conduct a pilot experiment in schools. Of course,
Microsoft hopes to be in on the rise of the laptop, which could prove
phenomenal in the near future. We also imagine that the computer giant
will put pressure on the managers of the One Laptop per Child project to
at least make their small computer compatible with Windows products. To
do this, Microsoft will have to make a clear effort to adapt to these
computers without hard drives. Mobile telephony In the extremely
competitive mobile telephony market, the best growth opportunities are
also to be found in the supply side adapted to emerging markets. In this
regard, the two largest players in the sector, Nokia and Motorola, have
succeeded in their first attempts. Samsung, the world number 3, also
wants to develop cell phones accessible to Asian, Latin American and
other markets. Initially launched for humanitarian reasons, this
announced invasion of the laptop at more or less \$100 is therefore
added to the massive implementation of wireless telephony in emerging
markets. Imagine what will happen when hundreds of millions of computers
flood India, China, Brazil and more! When this happens, that is to say
in the fairly near future, audiovisual content will circulate with much
more intensity with or without authorization! Can you imagine the
confusion over the notion of piracy? Didn\'t the Motion Picture
Association of America (MPAA), an association that defends the interests
of Hollywood giants, indicate (last Thursday) that film piracy in China
had caused the film industry to lose \$2.7 billion in revenue in 2005?
Hollywood hasn\'t finished complaining! One thing is certain: the
remuneration models for creators of digital content will also have to
adapt to the economic reality of these huge markets. Cheaper machines,
cheaper connections, cheaper content. And long live the \$100 laptop!
For more information: www.laptop.org/index.fr.html www.olpcnews.com To
contact our journalist: alain.brunet@lapresse.ca

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1443

ADVICE. The mc2i group, which specializes in information systems
consulting, is looking for 60 consultants for 2007. Whether they are
recent graduates or experienced consultants, the positions concern
specialists in human resources information systems, capital markets and
retail banking, as well as consultants in business intelligence or
technical. net, Java or Opensource. (Photo Maxppp)

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1444

MICROSOFT Since November 30, five years after Windows XP and two years
late, Windows Vista, the new operating system for PCs (Personal
Computers), has been available to businesses. Accompanied by the
simultaneous launches of new versions of Office (office automation) and
Exchange Server (internet messaging), the release of Vista represents a
major event for the computer giant, Microsoft. 90% of the world\'s PCs
run on Windows. Thus, Microsoft makes 90% of its profits thanks to the
Windows-Office pair. In addition, according to the research firm IDC,
each euro invested in Windows Vista should generate 14 euros of
additional revenue for partners specializing in the sale of hardware,
software and services. Steve Ballmer, CEO of Microsoft, mentions a total
of 250 billion dollars in global revenue over the next twelve months.
When it was released in 2001, the previous Windows XP operating system
took a year to equip 10% of business PCs. Vista\'s task could prove more
laborious. While Microsoft has communicated at length on the progress of
its security strategy, the visible improvements remain unspectacular. We
will note a new graphical interface with a 3D display (already seen in
Apple\'s Mac OSX), an improved internal search (similar to Google
Desktop), a more efficient \"firewall\", a daily backup system, voice
recognition\... Tools that can now be found for free on the Internet.
Office is also facing competition from Google\'s free office suite or
Open Office. Coming from the world of free software, this program has
already been adopted by a number of French administrations. However,
Microsoft\'s most serious competitor remains\... itself. Windows XP (and
the same goes for Office) is a good product. According to Gartner, the
adoption rate of Vista will not exceed 10% in 2007. The firm even
recommends that companies wait eighteen months before upgrading their
fleet. The migration of a large company\'s complex IT system could cause
more malfunctions than benefits. The growth of Vista would then depend
on the renewal of machines, helped by the purchase of PCs for
individuals (from January 30, 2007). However, the uncertainty only
concerns the speed at which Vista will spread. When Windows XP support
is no longer assured and new programs will only run under Vista, users
will have to comply with the new rules. In the end, the Microsoft
steamroller will overcome the last reluctance.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1445

JEAN-PIERRE JOUYET, MAURICE LEVY \"MAKE the work of the Lévy-Jouyet
mission on the intangible (\...) an essential fuel to fuel the program
of my political family.\" Five months before the presidential elections,
the Minister of Finance, Thierry Breton, is now officially playing on
both sides, political and economic. Tasked last March with reflecting on
the role of the intangible economy, the president of Publicis - Maurice
Lévy - and the head of the Inspectorate of Finance - Jean-Pierre Jouyet
-, who submitted their report yesterday, have indirectly paid the price.
While they define this new form of economy as \"having no physical
foundation\" but placing \"intellectual capacity, knowledge,
imagination, innovation and research at the heart of value creation\",
Thierry Breton, for his part, sees it more simply as the \"economy of
the future\", copying the slogan \"The France of the future\" of the
president of the UMP, Nicolas Sarkozy\... The mission\'s report is,
however, not at all anecdotal, nor even - contrary to appearances -
theoretical. Far from it. According to the Lévy-Jouyet mission,
intangible services already account for around 20% of the added value
produced in France and nearly 15% of employment, as much as the
automobile industry. But, above all, they offer formidable prospects: if
it gives itself the means to promote and develop it, France could derive
an additional point of growth from it in the coming years to bring its
potential growth to between 3 and 4% and thus catch up with its
neighbours. The 70 recommendations made by the report revolve around
three axes: strengthening human capital (\"Marshall Plan\" for higher
education, new policy of support for creation); increased development of
innovative SMEs (financing of the protection of ideas, public-private
partnerships in research); finally, total redefinition of the scope of
State assets, invited to better promote its cultural brands, its
intangible assets, or to reconsider all the rents and rights that it
attributes. It is in this area that the Lévy-Jouyet report presents the
most innovative ideas, such as the creation of an \"agency of intangible
assets\", which would be responsible for identifying and managing the
real value of the State\'s heritage; Museums could also be authorized to
manage their works directly or to open branches abroad, like the
Guggenheim Foundation\... \"We have not been able to assess all the
avenues and a lot of work still needs to be done,\" admits a member of
the commission. Thierry Breton wants to decline several of these
proposals in the coming weeks. He already announced yesterday the launch
of a working group to modernize the Made in France label and the
creation of a new competitiveness cluster dedicated to \"free software
and open source.\" But since he does not have time to initiate the
other, more structural recommendations, he intends to take the report to
the political sphere. Example? \"With the Internet, people consume and
buy online at any time of the day or night, including weekends,\"
explains Maurice Lévy, for whom this is a revolution to be taken into
account in the organization of work. For Thierry Breton, \"this shows
that we can work more and for longer.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1446

\"Here is the result,\" announced Publicis CEO Maurice Levy, handing a
USB key to the Minister of the Economy, Thierry Breton. Before adding,
not a little proud of his effect, that those who \"have not yet moved to
the era of the immaterial\" will be able to consult the paper version of
the voluminous report on this \"economy of the immaterial,\" which he
produced in the company of the head of the Finance Inspectorate,
Jean-Pierre Jouyet, and around twenty public and private sector players.
Commissioned in March by Bercy, this 168-page tome, as rich as it is
confusing by dint of wanting to embrace too much, proposes 70 measures
to boost this economy which \"has no physical foundation\" and which
depends \"less on factories than on imagination.\" This is a sector
present to varying degrees in software, perfumes, culture or education,
and which already represents 15 to 20% of jobs in France and
constitutes, in the words of the minister, \"the most promising growth
factor\" in the era of all \"post\" (demographic transition, oil and
industry). \"Dynamize\". The objective is not small since it involves
raising the country\'s potential growth to 3% or 4% instead of the 2 to
2.5% today, by banking on this lever of the intangible. A perfectly
achievable objective by 2010 according to the report, as long as we
follow the various and varied recipes, consisting essentially of
\"dynamiting to redynamize\", as Levy explains and not \"to please one
camp or another on the political level\". The main tool for moving
towards this new economy \"of innovation and no longer of rent\",
taxation. The report recommends in particular aligning corporate tax in
France with the European average, paying more attention to \"human
capital\" by increasing financial incentives for training expenses, not
taxing \"new sources of wealth\" and considering a reform of VAT, etc.
The other very big project concerns education and research, in order to
make France one of the great \"educational superpowers of tomorrow\".
More money will be needed (half a point of GDP more), but also more
autonomy, selection and public-private partnerships in universities so
that France can align more than two names in the top 100 of the best
teaching centers established by the University of Shanghai. Mediator. A
very French tradition, the report finally recommends the creation of
several structures in order to ensure the proper development of this
economy of the intangible. First, an artistic rights mediator
responsible for ensuring that the collective management of copyright by
organizations such as Sacem is carried out in complete transparency.
Then a \"high council for growth through immateriality\", under the
presidency of the Prime Minister. Thierry Breton, who compared this work
to that accomplished at the end of the 70s by Simon Nora and Alain Minc
on the computerization of French society, promised to draw on it
extensively in the coming months to fuel the presidential debates. As
the first concrete translations, he announced the establishment of a
reflection on a label no longer \"made in France\", but \"designed in
France\" and a competitiveness cluster on free software.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1447

San Francisco - BitTorrent, the maker of one of the most popular
file-sharing programs on the Internet, has partnered with several major
movie and television studios to sell movies and TV shows for download,
BitTorrent announced Wednesday. BitTorrent, whose software launched in
2001 is the mainstay of the online pirated movie exchange, says it plans
to launch a platform for legal, paid downloads of movies and TV shows in
February 2007. For the past year, BitTorrent has clearly opted for
legality. Last year, the California-based company decided to eliminate
from its website links to pirated content from the seven major studios
that are members of the Motion Picture Association of America. In May,
it reached an initial agreement with Warner Studios to sell more than
200 Warner films and TV shows, including titles such as Harry Potter and
the Goblet of Fire. The much broader deal announced Wednesday included
Paramount Studios (Viacom), 20th Century Fox (News Corp), MTV and G4,
Palm Pictures and the cable channel Starz Media. It provides for
BitTorrent to sell series and films on its site, generally on the day of
the DVD release, protected against piracy: the films can only be watched
on a computer or portable player, but not burned onto a DVD or watched
on a home DVD player. The new deal will include titles such as \"Mission
Impossible \*\*\*\", \"Ghost in the Shell\", and series such as \"24\".
BitTorrent was until recently the nightmare of the film industry, which
estimates that it lost more than \$6 billion in 2005 because of pirated
films circulating on the Internet. In May, BitTorrent CEO Ashwin Navin
said that even if some Internet users refused to pay, this would be
largely offset by \"the potential for converting 5 to 10 percent of
BitTorrent users,\" an estimated 65 million, to legality. The
open-source software, BT, allows downloads from multiple sources, each
of which provides only a small portion of the total. This allows for
quick and easy downloads, including very large files such as movies.
Traffic from systems based on BT technology accounts for up to 40
percent of total Internet traffic, according to BitTorrent. The company
believes that its BitTorrent.com site could become \"the ideal platform
for distributing digital content on the Internet.\" It will also offer
music and games. Pricing will be announced in February. BitTorrent also
believes that its platform could also be used \"by thousands of
websites, including those of content creators.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1448

IMPOSING yourself against Microsoft Windows requires time and patience.
It took fifteen years for the Linux operating system to become a
credible alternative to the flagship program of the company founded by
Bill Gates, betting from the start, in 1991, on a philosophy opposed to
that followed by the Redmond giant. While Microsoft has succeeded in
imposing a proprietary system, Linux promotes free software by allowing
everyone to make their contribution. The goal is not to make money, but
to bring total freedom to users, by giving them the keys to the Linux
universe. However, Linux almost never left the labs. When Linus
Torvalds, one of the men who contributed to its advent, published the
results of his work on Internet forums in the early 1990s, the
reputation of this computer system was more than confidential. But, over
the years, Windows\' major competitor has made a breakthrough among
professionals. It has even just made its entry into the French
administration, notably in the National Assembly. The national
gendarmerie recently decided to migrate its IT to a Linux software-based
solution. The Île-de-France region has also been won over. In this,
France is only imitating examples from abroad. In the United States,
many administrations have abandoned Microsoft for a range of
applications from Linux. Across the Rhine, the German Parliament has
decided to equip itself with Linux. More surprisingly, part of the
Chinese counter-espionage services have preferred to link their future
to free software\... In companies, Linux, on the other hand, is fighting
neck and neck with Microsoft for the administration of internal
networks, Web servers or database management. According to specialist
research firms, Linux servers hold nearly 30% of the global market in
their category. On the other hand, Linux has not conquered the personal
computer of Mr. Everyman. Its market share is limited to 3.5%. Few
amateurs dare to install it on their machine. However, Linux has not
been reserved for microcomputer experts for a long time. Companies such
as Mandriva or Redhat have developed turnkey solutions for several years
allowing anyone to install a Linux system on a PC or Mac.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1449

Disgruntled merchants closing shop, residents protesting and calling for
a boycott, a currency marking time\... The 1.6 million residents of
Second Life, the best-known 3D virtual universe on the Internet, have
had some troubled days in their parallel online world. At the root of
the troubles is an open-source program called CopyBot, which facilitates
the cloning of avatars or characters and various objects and accessories
in this game. In other words, a potentially devastating copying software
for this nascent online economy, based on the real trade of 100% virtual
goods. Objects (clothing, haircuts, jewelry, etc.) that proliferate as
this universe grows (36% per month), and that their creators,
individuals or companies, spend hours designing with their computers.
This activity is not philanthropic: it is used to equip their own
avatars or those of others to whom they sell them. Success. \"A
real-world scourge is coming into our second lives: counterfeiting,\"
summarizes Wolkam Winger, editor-in-chief of SLObserver, a French blog
dedicated to Second Life (SL), and also a designer and seller of virtual
living rooms within the game. Of course, the number of complaints
remains limited (around a hundred out of more than 200,000 players
likely to have been victims of CopyBot). But avatars now know that they
can fear for the \"uniqueness\" of their skin. And Linden Labs, the
Californian publisher and project manager of Second Life, is well aware
that its growing success makes it increasingly vulnerable to the
pitfalls of the real world. Originally, the creators of CopyBot had no
intention of harming the harmony of their online community. The free
software developer group \"libsecondlife\" had developed this
application with the aim of reverse engineering, that is, allowing
players to correct bugs in their creations by means of temporary copies.
But, like Frankenstein, the cloning machine ended up escaping its
creators. Famous avatars of Second Life, like Adam Reuters, the
permanent special correspondent of the agency of the same name, or
Hamlet Au, the most famous of SL reporters, voluntarily let themselves
be duplicated in order to test the tool. Others were duplicated at their
expense. CopyBot ended up trading around 3,000 Linden dollars (271
Linden dollars to the dollar). Thanks to it, its buyers can wildly
duplicate an avatar and its texture, a dress, a car, etc. in a few
seconds. \"It\'s a real pain, clearly a lot of people have used this
script to get as many items as possible,\" explains Yoko Xiao, a
clothing designer inside Second Life. \"It seems that all the merchants
have seen a drop in their sales.\" Like Tommy Fairplay, owner of the
DragonFly shopping mall, various influential figures in SL have urged
residents to close up shop, denouncing a \"Black Friday\" on their
community. A wave of panic that was initially underestimated by the
publisher: in the first few days, Linden Labs\' reaction was limited to
promising anti-copy solutions while advising those who felt cheated to
file a complaint under the DMCA, the American copyright law. Since then,
the publisher has corrected the situation, promising to exclude any
player who owns a CopyBot. Tests. If this virtual cloning alert has
caused such a stir within the community, to the point that its residents
have rushed to buy anti-CopyBot protections, it is because Second Life
is already much more than a game for many of its fans. Tens of thousands
of residents have developed small businesses there, particularly in
fashion design. If their objects can be copied and then resold, their
activity collapses. This reasoning is valid for the very real companies
(read below) that come to test their products there. \"In the same way
that Second Life partly prefigures the Web of tomorrow, the CopyBot
prefigures new forms of diversion and piracy, concludes Wolkam Winger,
it is unfortunately inevitable.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1450

It is a clever cocktail composed of multiple ingredients. A little
technology, a lot of new uses, a big ladle of sharing, exchanges and
participation, networking and a pinch of mobility. Web 2.0: the
expression is fashionable, but it has no well-defined limits. It means
above all that the Internet has changed a lot. Yesterday, we consulted a
site. Today, we participate in it. We pick, we link, we connect, we
edit, we add\... On Web 2.0, information and data are no longer fixed,
they no longer belong to anyone and are enriched by circulating. Look at
blogs. At the time of the first version of the Web, or Web 1.0, we built
our personal page. Internet users consulted it and could recommend it to
others. Now, the content of a blog is commented on, corrected, taken up
in whole or in part on other blogs and other sites. With the personal
page, the format itself was imposed. In Web 2.0, some see a revolution,
a takeover of Internet users, or even a \"putsch of users\". It is the
subject of many controversies. \"Web 2.0 is the latest trendy thing,\"
writes Tristan Nitot, president of Mozilla Europe, an association
dedicated to the development of free software (standblog.org/blog/), on
his blog. What is fascinating is that no one knows how to define it
correctly. For my part, I would be careful not to give a definition of
Web 2.0\... Especially since I find the name lamentable, because it
ignores an essential point: the Web has been constantly evolving since
its birth!\" Web 2.0 arrived without warning, little by little, and has
settled into our habits click by click. \"Google is perhaps the first
Web 2.0 application,\" says Didier Rappaport, co-founder of the
Dailymotion site (www.dailymotion.com), one of the jewels of the new
French Web. Explanation: Google prioritizes its responses, taking into
account the number of links to a given page. In other words, it is the
users who enrich the site, which typically corresponds to the modalities
of Web 2.0. \"BROADCAST YOURSELF\" \"The Internet user has gone from
being a simple consumer to being a contributor,\" explains Didier
Rappaport. Dailymotion certainly relies on somewhat innovative
technologies, but it is above all the users who constitute its business
and ensure its success. The principle is simple: on Dailymotion, you
post your videos and watch those posted by other Internet users. Better
still: in a few manipulations, you can make any video appear on your own
site or blog. The more videos there are, the more there are others and
the more Internet users there are\... This inflationary system explains
the rapid success of sharing sites. YouTube (www.youtube.com), the
American equivalent of Dailymotion, created in February 2005, has just
been bought by Google for the sum of 1.65 billion dollars. YouTube\'s
slogan alone sums up the Web 2.0 program: \"broadcast yourself\".
Another symbolic site of this second generation of the Web is the
participatory encyclopedia \"Wikipedia\" (fr. wikipedia.org). Written by
Internet users themselves, it presents itself as a \"freely
distributable\" work. Each visitor can create new pages, new articles
and modify the content of existing pages. It is therefore the Internet
user who now provides the content of the Web and who chooses its form.
It creates and feeds content: written content with blogs or
participatory sites, audio with podcasts in particular, video on
exchange sites like YouTube, or even photos with Flickr. In all cases,
we don\'t just exchange data and information. We build communities,
groups. One of the other major trends of this revised and corrected Web
is that we create networks, preferably social networks. We group
together by interests, we exchange, we communicate, we help each other.
CONSTANT LINKS Thanks to instant messaging, such as Windows Live
Messenger (ex-MSN), we can permanently check who is online and who is
not. With a mobile phone, we can update our blog, send photos, enhance
our personal space with videos. And we stay in touch with our community,
anywhere and at any time. Version after version, publishers are
accustomed to numbering their software. Microsoft recently unveiled the
seventh version of its famous Internet browser Microsoft Internet
Explorer, called Microsoft Internet Explorer 7.0. In October 2004, Dale
Daugherty, the inventor of the term Web 2.0, was inspired by this usage.
The CEO of O\'Reilly Media, an American publisher of computer manuals, a
specialist in information and systems management, and a former lecturer
at the University of Berkeley, was looking to define in a simple formula
all the changes he was observing on the Web. To translate this movement
and be able to talk about it, he simply used the nomenclature he knew
best: that of the computer universe.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1451

All over the world, open source software, the type of software that can
be shared or modified for free, is on the rise. A study by the Forrester
group published last September revealed that 40% of European companies
and 35% of American companies use one or more open source software
programs. In Canada, the trend is moving in the same direction, even if
we feel that we are lagging behind the rest of the world. \"It\'s not
the other countries that are ahead; it\'s us who are behind,\"
summarizes Cyrille Béraud, president of Savoir-Faire Linux, a Montreal
company that develops \"open source\" solutions, such as the Internet
telephony software SFLPhone, which can be downloaded for free. According
to Mr. Béraud, this is a significant delay that could cost Canada and
Quebec dearly. \"In a knowledge economy, open source software is the
only software that allows a company\'s information system to evolve
quickly enough to keep up with market developments,\" he says. Open
source software is like a big box of mechanical parts offered for free.
Free software is the assembly of some of these parts to make a tool that
suits a company\'s mission. Between two companies that offer the same
product, the one that can adapt more quickly to the needs of its
customers has a competitive advantage over its rival. \"That\'s the
advantage of free software,\" says Mr. Béraud. \"We only change the
components that need to be changed.\" 200 companies in Quebec FACIL, an
organization for the collective appropriation of free computing (the F
is recursive, it\'s computer humour), is behind the Semaine québécoise
de l\'informatique libre, which took place last week. It is also a group
where local free software developers meet. \"The Week was quieter this
year, but our developer directory still contains more than 200 company
names,\" notes Robin Millette, outgoing president of FACIL. And as Mr.
Millette points out, these companies are diverse. \"Savoir-Faire Linux
is a good example, as is the organization Ile-sans-fil, which offers
free Wi-Fi access wherever it can in Montreal, Koumbit, which develops
tools to manage websites, and TC2L, a computer consulting firm,\" he
says. Most of the time, free software developers will offer their
solutions at low cost, to take advantage of the revenue generated by
technical support and customer service. \"In this form, free software is
interesting because it is the real way the software industry has always
worked,\" believes Antoine Beaupré, who heads Koumbit, a non-profit
organization that develops websites strictly using \"free\" tools.
Moreover, Koumbit uses some free software that demonstrates the extent
of this movement: Drupal, a website content manager, and Decisions, an
online decision-making support module, which could be seen as an \"open
source\" and more reliable version of the electronic voting system that
experienced failures in Montreal last year. \"That\'s another advantage
of free software,\" Mr. Beaupré recalls. \"They are transparent, while
proprietary software is like a black box: we see what goes in and what
goes out, but we don\'t know how it works.\" In an economy where
information is the main commodity, there is no doubt that a company does
not want to lose sight of it. At least that is what free software
allows, by giving companies full control over this information. email To
contact our collaborator: alain.mckenna@lapresse.ca

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1452

MICROSOFT MICROSOFT is seeking to become the champion of
interoperability, a technical term for the ability of two systems or two
computer applications to communicate. This strategy is not without its
spice, because the computer giant is being sued by the European
Commission, which accuses it of blocking its competitors with
incompatible systems and applications. Particularly unhappy with the
attitude of the world\'s number one software company, which she accuses
of not respecting Brussels\' requirements, Nellie Kroes, European
Commissioner for Competition, risks imposing new sanctions tomorrow on
the empire founded by Bill Gates. The Commission\'s graduated response
provides that the fine, set this summer at 280 million euros, could
increase to 350 million euros. \"We are wondering what more we could
provide to the Commission,\" exclaims Bernard Ourghanlian, technical
director of Microsoft France. Clever, the world\'s number one software
company has announced its \"commitment to connecting users, data and
systems.\" The French subsidiary has also just opened a website for IT
developers and information systems directors in companies. \"Every two
weeks, a debate on a major topic will be accessible to all,\" explains
Bernard Ourghanlian. The group has also undertaken to standardize data
formats on Open XML, the Office System platform. Microsoft is
highlighting its cooperation with Cegid and Ilog, two French publishers
among some sixty French partners. It is working with them to ensure that
their professional applications can communicate with each other. At the
beginning of the month, Microsoft created a surprise by signing an
agreement with a big name in free software, Novell. Pragmatic, it is
seeking to ally itself with its former enemies and to bring people
together. Will the inflexible Nellie Kroes be susceptible to this new
charm offensive?

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1453

New York - Free software, which gained a new recruit of choice last
Monday with the Java programming language, is gradually gaining ground
in companies, replacing the protected software that makes the fortune of
groups like Microsoft. The American group Sun Microsystems announced
last week the opening of the source codes of its famous Java language,
which can thus be distributed and modified by third parties, as long as
the modifications are also distributed. This is a small revolution for
computer developers and a major contribution to the world of free
software, called \"open source\", whose leader is the Linux operating
system, challenger for 15 years to Microsoft\'s Windows system. Long
confined to IT professionals who are militant anti-Microsoft, the world
of free software has won several victories in recent months that
illustrate its expansion to the general public and especially to large
companies. Two weeks ago, even Microsoft reached out to free software
users by allying itself with the Novell group, which distributes an
operating system derived from Linux, Suse Linux. Microsoft and Novell
will make their operating systems compatible, each will distribute both
systems and they will jointly release common solutions. \"Sun\'s
decision was long-awaited and does not represent a fundamental change,
because the company will retain control over the Java language, but
there is a general trend towards the development of free software,\"
commented Forrester analyst Michael Goulde, \"even at Microsoft.\"
\"More and more companies in the world are adopting free software,
especially in Europe,\" he stressed. A Forrester study last September of
600 large American companies and 300 European companies showed that 39%
of companies in Europe use one or more free software, and 35% in the
United States. Respectively 8% and 5% consider doing so in the two
regions, and only a third say they are opposed. The most open are
telecoms, media and entertainment companies (43% to 54% of free software
users), financial services companies (36% to 41% of users) as well as
50% of European public administrations and 35% of American ones. Free
software offers access to its source code (its \"kernel\") which allows
everyone to use it and especially to transform it. Contributors can be
freelance computer scientists who work from home in the four corners of
the world, but also associations or companies such as Oracle,
Hewlett-Packard, Oracle, Sun and IBM. Free software is not necessarily
free. Any company can develop and market its version. Another source of
profit is that of maintenance and user assistance, as offered by the Red
Hat group, leader in Linux maintenance. Proof that this market is
increasingly coveted, the Oracle group has just announced that it is
launching into Linux maintenance and wants to offer prices half those of
Red Hat. Among the most widely used free software are the Open Office
suite, which competes with Microsoft\'s Office software, the MySQL
database software, the OpenSSL encryption and secure Internet
communications software, the Apache web request software (web server)
and the Mozilla browser, a competitor to Microsoft\'s Internet Explorer.
Free software is also at the heart of devices such as the Freebox modem
from the French Internet service provider Free, Sharp personal
assistants and DivX video players.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1454

Internet users\' confidence in the system\'s ability to secure data has
always been relative. It could well collapse if the microprocessor
industry and encryption software providers prove incapable of responding
to a new type of attack, fearsomely effective, discovered by a team led
by German cryptologist Jean-Pierre Seifert (Universities of Haifa and
Innsbruck). Online commerce would then be threatened, but also, more
broadly, everything that allows the dematerialization of exchanges,
based on applications using so-called asymmetric secret codes, whether
it is to encrypt, sign or guarantee the integrity of digital data. In a
still confidential article, the researcher and his colleagues describe
how they were able, in a single attempt - a few milliseconds - to
recover almost the entirety of a 512-bit encryption key (a sequence of
as many 0s or 1s). For comparison, the largest public key broken to date
was 640 bits, and its decomposition, announced in November 2005, had
mobilized, for three months, 80 microprocessors clocked at 2.2 GHz.
Since the announcement, this summer, on the server of the International
Association for Cryptologic Research (IACR), of the theoretical
feasibility of such an attack, microprocessor producers have been on
edge: the chips of almost the entire computer fleet are in fact
vulnerable. To the point that the head of security at Intel, the world
number one in microprocessors, asked about the question, replied that he
would be \"unavailable for several weeks\". This is because the defense
against classic attacks on public key systems - namely extending the
size of the keys - is ineffective in this case. Jean-Pierre Seifert has
in fact taken these systems the wrong way. While their robustness is
based on the great difficulty in mathematically deducing the private,
secret key from its public complement, he was interested in how the
microprocessor read this confidential data internally. However, it turns
out that the very operating mode of the chip, optimized to speed up
calculations, makes it vulnerable. \"Security has been sacrificed for
the benefit of performance,\" the researcher believes. The principle of
the attack can be summarized as follows: to go ever faster, the
processor works in parallel and has a system for predicting the result
of the operation in progress. If the prediction is correct, the process
is significantly accelerated. If it is wrong, it is necessary to go back
and start the elementary operation again. It \"suffices\" to measure the
calculation time when the processor runs through the string of 0s and 1s
that constitute the encryption key to deduce it. This threat, called
\"branch prediction analysis\" (BPA), was already known, but it required
a large number of tests to statistically deduce the encryption key.
Which made it impractical. Jean-Pierre Seifert\'s breakthrough is that
only one listening is now necessary. And its strength lies in the fact
that the prediction process, which is fundamental to accelerating the
processor\'s performance, is not protected. A small \"mole\" software
could therefore listen to the chip discreetly, and send the key to
hackers, intelligence services or spies in the pay of competitors. \"A
MATTER OF WEEKS\" We are not quite there yet. \"We have not developed a
turnkey application that would be available online,\" defends
Jean-Pierre Seifert. But he believes that once his method is unveiled in
early 2007 at the next RSA conference - named after the most popular
encryption system - the development of such attack software will be \"a
matter of weeks\". Cryptography specialists confirm the seriousness of
the threat. On condition of anonymity, one of the world\'s leading
experts on public key systems sums up the situation bluntly: \"The real
solution is to review the very design of our microprocessors - a very
long and difficult process. A short-term solution would be to not allow
sensitive applications to run in parallel with standard operations on
the same computer, which is easier said than done in a traditional
working environment. There are still partial remedies, but they involve
slowing down the PC considerably.\" Jean-Jacques Quisquater (Université
catholique de Louvain, Belgium) points out that American military
standards have long warned against attacks based on the analysis of
calculation times. For him, the future lies in processors specialized in
security functions. \"But we won\'t get there for several years,\" he
notes. \"INTEL MUST BE DESPERATE\" \"We know very well that the only
undefinedundefinedvery secure operations are those conducted in a
protected enclosure, on the server side, with a specific module,\"
confirms Jacques Stern, director of the computer science laboratory at
the Ecole Normale Supérieure in Paris. A radical prophylaxis,
impractical for the average Internet user. David Naccache (Paris-II
University) acknowledges that \"there is no open-heart surgery
possible\": touching the prediction module system could affect essential
functions. On the front line, Intel limits itself to specifying
laconically that the next version of OpenSSL, a free data security
software, will respond to the threat, if necessary by disabling the
prediction module. \"Such a measure would slow down the microprocessor
by four times,\" assures Jean-Pierre Seifert, which proves how desperate
Intel must be. » A former employee of Intel and its competitor Infineon,
he himself returned to university and is now looking for ways to fix the
flaw he discovered. But since research in this area is recent, he warns,
\"it will take some time before we see clearly.\" Of course, the attack
he has designed is more difficult to implement than the countless
stratagems imagined by hackers, who force the industry to produce
\"patches\" constantly. In his case, a simple patch would not be enough.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1455

Trois-Rivières - Your caller ID is insulting you. You\'re getting calls
from people who claim they never called you. Your phone is probably
going haywire because of a hacker who\'s having fun at your expense. No,
this isn\'t a science fiction scenario. According to Mr. Sylvain Juteau,
Vice President of Business Development at Xittel Telecommunications,
it\'s entirely possible to take control of a phone using a computer. You
just need the right tools. \"Now with IP telephony, you can make calls
over the Internet. (\...) There are definitely some people who are
resourceful. They can set up a phone server with open source software
like Linux and they use it to make calls.\" \"Anyone can have their own
telephone exchange on a small PC. Joe Blo can do that at home in his
basement with software and a server,\" adds Mr. Juteau. Yesterday, it
was not possible to get confirmation from Bell Canada that it is indeed
a hacker who is involved in the case of the Trois-Rivières
restaurateurs. But according to Mr. Juteau, it is very likely that the
individual is calling his victims from a computer. It would not be
necessary to be a computer specialist to do it. \"A teenager who types
and sets up a Linux server can do pretty much whatever he wants. You
don\'t need a bachelor\'s degree in programming to do it.\" Thus, thanks
to appropriate software, a little computer whiz can write what he wants
on a display. \"People are used to trusting what is written on the
display. They think it can\'t be wrong. But with the Internet, that is
no longer true,\" notes Mr. Juteau. This software is easy to find.
\"They\'re all free and you can find them on the Internet. And on the
Internet, you can find help. These kinds of tools are becoming easier
and more accessible.\" Mr. Juteau believes that with good will, Bell
will be able to track down the guy who is currently making some
Trois-Rivières restaurateurs sweat. \"Yes, it\'s possible. But you have
to put in a lot of effort.\" Despite the few pirates who use IP
telephony to do dirty work, Mr. Juteau is convinced that this technology
has many more advantages than disadvantages. \"The advantage is that it
democratizes (telephony). It lowers prices. If long-distance calls now
cost almost nothing, it\'s thanks to the advent of the Internet, which
is removing the monopoly from traditional companies. But it\'s certain
that there\'s always a plus and a minus with the arrival of a new
technology.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1456

The Quebec Chamber of Commerce paid tribute to immigrant entrepreneurs
in the region as well as to companies that encourage the hiring of
immigrant workers during its 2006 Un monde à faire evening. The event
took place at the Théâtre Impérial in the presence of the Minister of
Immigration and Cultural Communities, Lise Thériault. On this occasion,
four awards were presented: the Immigrant du monde award was given to
Quân Triêu Trân, from Vietnam, founder of Norbati Consultants Trân &
Associés inc.; the Entreprise en urgence award was given to Techno
Centre LogicielsLibres; the Entreprise du monde, 30 employees and less
award went to CO2 Solution, an engineering consulting firm active in the
environmental sector; and the Entreprise du monde, 30 employees and more
award was given to Momentum Technologies inc., a consulting firm
specializing in information technology. Hélène Savard presents her new
collection \> Hélène Savard will present her 2007 collection tomorrow,
November 16, from 2 p.m. to 8 p.m., in her jewelry store at 2485, chemin
Saint-Louis. You will be able to see exclusive pieces. This year again,
the emphasis is on originality and creation. In addition to the 2007
collection, you will be able to see more than 325 pieces of jewelry made
by her jewelers on display. The collection will be on display together
until the end of November. Ms. Savard is a designer, a GIA graduate and
a qualified appraiser. Michel Pigeon to chair Fidéides After having
vigilantly and meticulously chaired the jury committees in recent years,
Michel Pigeon, Rector of Université Laval, will serve as Honorary
President of the 24th prestigious event of excellence of the Chambre de
commerce des entrepreneurs de Québec, Fidéides 2007, which will be held
at the Québec City Convention Centre on March 15. Izba Spa to offer
training For eight years, Michelle Piuze and the professionals at the
Izba Spa health and beauty centre have been providing exceptional
quality body care. Today, Izba Spa is offering its hands in a different
way, by creating the Izba Spa Training Institute and its exclusive
Diplomas in Hands program. Builders honoured Nearly 200 people gathered
at the Hôtel des Commandants in Gaspé a few days ago to salute the
commitment and dedication of three families of entrepreneurs from Gaspé:
the Adams, the Dumaresqs and the McCallums. Mélissa Plourde, president
of the Gaspé Chamber of Commerce, delivered a message of admiration for
these families, but at the same time a message of recognition. \"You are
the symbol of economic prosperity, the image of success and development.
You have forged the image of the accomplished entrepreneur and we thank
you for that,\" she said. pchampagne@lesoleil.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1457

VIDEO GAMES. Nintendo will use Sonic Solutions\' program to watch movies
on its future Wii console. Nintendo will launch this version of the Wii
in the second half of next year. TELECOMS. Spanish Telefonica is taking
8% of PCCW, Hong Kong\'s largest telecommunications operator, for around
323 million euros. It is carrying out this operation with the operator
China Netcom, of which it owns 5%. SOFTWARE. Sun announced yesterday
that its Java language is becoming \"free\" software, the source code of
which will be accessible if the user signs a GPL V2 license. Java is
already integrated into more than 500 million objects. TRANSPORT. SNCF
and a consortium including AXA and the Caisse de dépôt et placement du
Québec have signed a memorandum of understanding under the terms of
which the consortium has agreed to take 55% of Keolis on an equal
footing. TRANSPORT. THE CLERMONT-FERRAND TRAMWAY ON TIRES MANUFACTURED
BY LOHR INDUSTRIE, WHOSE COMMISSIONING HAD BEEN POSTPONED FOLLOWING AN
INCIDENT DURING TESTING, WAS OBTAINED PERMIT TO OPERATE YESTERDAY. REAL
ESTATE. Luis del Rivero, CEO of the Spanish construction group Sacyr
Vallehermoso, yesterday ruled out any withdrawal of capital from the
French group Eiffage to finance its increase in the capital of the oil
company Repsol.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1458

\"Just one last word: yes, things are happening on the Web.\" François
Bayrou doesn\'t have time to say more. The end credits of the show Arrêt
sur images force him to be silent. A missed opportunity for the UDF
leader to push himself. Because, in the blogosphere, the UDF candidate
for the Elysée is a star. It must be said that the MP for
Pyrénées-Atlantiques is working hard. An unrepentant \"practitioner\",
he connects nearly two hours a day, writes comments on other people\'s
blogs himself, gives notable interviews, for example to PoliTIC\'Show on
AgoraVox or to the journalist John-Paul Lepers for his blog. Posted on
Dailymotion a month ago, the webcam interview was seen by 11,850 curious
people. On October 25, Bayrou attended the meeting organized at the
Baltard pavilion by the Republic of Blogs, a meeting place for political
cybercommentators. On the Internet, his popularity rating was boosted
after his position in favor of free software at the time of the
copyright law. According to the online \"poll\" by AgoraVox (1), 33% of
participating Internet users would vote for Bayrou in the first round of
the presidential election, compared to 18% in favor of Ségolène Royal
and 15% for Nicolas Sarkozy. A score that is not really \"scientific,\"
but has been steadily increasing since the beginning of the year. \"We
are not drawing any conclusions from this, except perhaps that Internet
users are more sensitive than the electorate to François Bayrou\'s
ideas,\" explains Frédéric Lefebvre-Naré, a specialist polling service
provider called in by Bayrou as reinforcements at the beginning of the
year. Nevertheless, the attitude of those connected may be indicative of
what will happen during the campaign.\" Bayrou measured the
\"revolutionary\" potential of this \"alternative media\" very early on.
Under his leadership, the UDF converted to video chats and other
\"tupperweb meetings\", anchoring the movement very early on in the
world of the \"connected\". In the centrist ranks, active Internet users
are proliferating: in addition to the party\'s two official sites (2),
more than 150 activists and almost as many sympathisers now keep a blog.
Since his outburst against the \"collusion\" between audiovisual media
and power, Bayrou\'s cyber audience has exploded. \"The frequency of
e-mails received on our official site has doubled\", indicates the
UDF\'s Web manager, Béatrice Pouyès. \"During the vote on the motion of
censure in May, we had already observed a surge, but the phenomenon
quickly subsided. Today, what is striking is that it is not going
down.\" The same observation is made with online memberships, which have
gone from 50 to 500 per month. \"Last weekend, I couldn\'t believe my
eyes: I saw online memberships arriving from all over France by the
dozens,\" says Béatrice Pouyès. \"However, nothing was happening: it was
Sunday, the school holidays, and Bayrou was in Polynesia\...\" (1) 4,807
voters on November 10. (2) www.udf.org and www.udf-europe.net

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1459

FORTY years after its creation, Microsoft has maintained a
quasi-monopoly on operating systems. Bill Gates\' company has resisted
everything. The most virulent - and well-founded - criticism of the
quality of its software, lawsuits, competitors, free software,
piracy\... Does its strength lie in its extraordinary technological
mastery and creativity? In a superior strategic vision? Outside the
company, few people put forward such explanations. Many experts argue
the opposite. Microsoft\'s secret lies elsewhere. In its realism that
borders on cynicism and its insatiable appetite. These qualities have
been revealed over the course of trials and tribulations, with,
initially, a stroke of luck that was probably unique in the annals of
the industry. In 1981, Microsoft obtained a contract from IBM, which at
the time did not believe in personal computers, to supply the operating
system for its brand new PCs. All of Bill Gates\' skill consisted in
never losing the benefit of this boost and always amplifying its
effects. To achieve this, he had the intelligence to never give in to
the temptation\... of genius. His resided in a remarkable ability to
take advantage of that of others. With methods often on the borderline
between legality and illegality. The Microsoft machine behaved like a
suction pump for the surrounding intelligence. Gradually, the MS-DOS
operating system was enriched by the inventions of Apple, with Windows
95 and 98, or of Netscape and Firefox with Internet Explorer. Bill Gates
has also demonstrated his ability to quickly detect his errors, as with
MSN, the Internet service provider tempted by the closed model of AOL
but quickly converted to the open standard of the emerging World Wide
Web in 1995. The technical and commercial agreement with Novell, the
publisher of the free software Linux, unveiled very recently (Le Monde,
November 6) is based on the same logic. The agglomeration of innovations
has often generated operating systems of disproportionate size and
complexity. Never mind. Microsoft had already acquired, thanks to IBM, a
position beyond the reach of its competitors, whether IBM itself, Sun or
Apple. BUY OUT OR MARGINALIZE Bill Gates has also demonstrated an
incomparable perception of the market. And has never hesitated to
eliminate, buy out or marginalize his competitors. By imposing his
operating systems via computer vendors. By gradually integrating
different software into them. The only misstep in this progression was
the lawsuit filed in the United States and taken up again in Europe for
the merger of Internet Explorer and Windows. A sin that could have led
to the company being split up. Microsoft, after years of legal battles,
got away with fines. After XP in 2001, Vista today marks a new stage for
the Redmond company. That of integrating security, a three-dimensional
graphical interface and the connection with the multimedia world of home
cinema into the operating system. This strategy continues to reduce the
field left to competitors. The only danger for the giant: the emergence
of brilliant innovators like the creators of Google. But Microsoft will
fight the battle, let us have no doubt, with the determination that has
kept it at the top until now.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1460

In this Japanese online store, you can buy a miniature cell phone to
hang on your cell phone. Either it\'s cell phone idolatry taken to the
extreme, or it\'s a technological homage to Russian dolls, or it\'s a
highly artistic concept of telephone mise en abyme. In any case, it will
be of great interest to your psychoanalyst.
http://item.rakuten.co.jp/keitai/134-mobileau2/ Windows VistaCopy of Mac
OS X! At least that\'s what the very clever Internet user who posted a
montage on YouTube adding images of Mac OS X to the soundtrack of a
public presentation of Windows Vista suggests. Microsoft\'s future
operating system thus seems to \"borrow\" many features from Apple\'s,
even if the speaker insists on their originality. It\'s true that the
comparison is troubling (and amusing), and is part of the tradition that
has lasted for more than 20 years among Apple fans: systematically
accusing Microsoft of plagiarism. That said, critical minds will point
out that Mac OS X itself borrowed many of its qualities from the
Unix-Linux universe, and that in any case, it\'s all the better for us
if good ideas circulate between systems. www.youtube.com Search for
\"Vista first of a kind features\". Contribute to Firefox 3.0 When a
software comes out in stores, its creators are already working on the
next one. In the case of Firefox, the now famous open-source browser,
all Internet users are invited to participate in this brainstorming.
Version 2.0 has barely been released and you can already publish your
proposals for version 3.0 on the \"wiki\" site of the Mozilla
Foundation, which oversees this non-profit project. Among the ideas
already put forward: an even greater role for \"tabs,\" which could
extend up to two rows at the top of the window and be grouped by
addresses or common themes; the ability to associate \"tags\" (personal
keywords) with Web pages; or a \"stripped\" option that would leave only
the basic tools to improve performance on portable systems. The most
daring among you can already download an \"alpha\" version of Firefox
3.0, on the ftp.mozilla.org server. At your own risk, of course.
http://wiki.mozilla.org/Firefox:Home_Page Edit your photos like Tom
Cruise In the film Minority Report, Tom Cruise manipulated his computer
with break-dancing gestures, which made all fans of futuristic
interfaces drool. We don\'t know if it was the cinema that influenced
the research or the other way around, but the interface in question now
exists in prototype form. It was Jef Han, a mathematician at New York
University, who presented it at the TED conference, which brings
together every year in Monterey the visionaries of technology and
interactive design (as well as curious people like Al Gore, Bono and
Peter Gabriel). In his filmed demonstration, we can see him controlling
a photo editing software on a translucent screen, only with the
movements and pressure of his fingertips. With such sporty interfaces,
the stereotype of the potbellied computer scientist will not last long!
www.ted.com/tedtalksSearch for the keyword \"Han\".

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1461

NEW YORK CORRESPONDENT - By concluding an unexpected technical and
commercial agreement with the publisher Novell, Microsoft is making a
strategic U-turn. It is bowing to the desire of its customers to also
use the free Linux operating system and will allow the version marketed
by Novell (Suse) to work harmoniously with its own Windows system. The
two companies will create a joint research center. This alliance
unveiled Thursday, November 2 in San Francisco by Microsoft CEO Steve
Ballmer and Novell CEO Ron Hovsepian, will last at least until 2012.
Until now, the firm founded by Bill Gates has been fiercely fighting
Linux for years without succeeding in preventing it from winning, thanks
to its reliability and flexibility, a significant share of the computer
server market. Many companies have long wanted to be able to use both
this technology and that of the world\'s number one software company.
They will soon be able to do so easily by running Suse Linux Enterprise
Server under Windows Longhorn in virtual environments or vice versa.
Neither company will market its partner\'s product. \"This agreement
will really help bridge the divide between open source and proprietary
software. I recognize that Linux plays an important role in the
technology mix that our customers use,\" Ballmer said. He added that
Microsoft still intends to promote Windows over Linux, providing
compatibility with Suse only if its customers request it. \"This
agreement provides both interoperability and peace of mind for
consumers,\" Hovsepian said. NOT AN ADMISSION OF WEAKNESS Analysts say
Microsoft\'s decision should not be interpreted as an admission of
weakness for a company that is struggling to establish itself on the
Internet against Google, in music against Apple, and is even threatened
in its stronghold of office software by a Google-Sun-Oracle alliance.
The Novell deal should be a big boost to Microsoft\'s server software by
assuring companies that they can invest safely in both Linux and
Windows. Both systems have been steadily taking market share, not so
much from each other, but mostly from mini- and even mainframes that run
on Unix. Microsoft\'s server software sales are now \$10 billion (€7.9
billion) a year, and they were growing 17 percent in the last quarter.
However, some Linux advocates are concerned about the implications of
the deal. Microsoft has pledged not to sue developers and users of Suse
Linux for intellectual property infringement, but reserves the right to
do so for other versions of the free operating system. \"That\'s very
dangerous,\" says Bruce Perens, a Linux expert and advocate. \"There\'s
an implicit threat: You buy Microsoft Novell licenses or you\'re going
to end up in court.\" The clear beneficiary of the deal is Novell. More
than a decade ago, the publisher tried to position itself as a rival to
the Bill Gates-founded company, notably by buying the Borland and
WordPerfect office software and marrying them to its own operating
system. The strategy had completely failed. The alliance with its old
enemy will give Novell a considerable advantage over its competitor Red
Hat, the leading distributor of Linux. \"Novell has just taken a huge
leap in credibility,\" said Stephen O\'Grady, an analyst at RedMonk.
Matthew Szulik, Red Hat\'s CEO, reacted immediately: \"Linux is now a
critical component of the information technology infrastructure,\" he
said, also calling Novell a \"weakened and vulnerable company.\" Also
weakened by the new distribution strategy of Oracle, the world\'s second
largest software company, Red Hat has lost nearly 15% on Wall Street
over the past ten days. At the same time, Novell shares have gained more
than 14%.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1462

If communism was the Soviets plus electricity, free software is the
cooperative plus stock options. The agreement signed Thursday evening
between Microsoft and Novell demonstrates this once again: the software
industry is undergoing a profound change with the success of free
software, designed in cooperation and copyable for free, unlike the
model supported by the firm founded by Bill Gates. And the historic
enemy, Microsoft, finds itself obliged to negotiate. \"It\'s incredible
that after years of denigration, Microsoft is forced to compromise with
free software,\" says Thierry Noisette, co-author with Perline Noisette
of the Battle of Free Software (1). Coming from the counterculture. This
alliance seems paradoxical at first glance because these programs, of
which GNU/Linux is the most emblematic, are indeed coming from the
counterculture. At the origin of this phenomenon, we find a bearded man
with a hippie look, Richard Stallman, who decided in the mid-80s to
build an alternative to so-called \"proprietary\" software, whose
manufacturing secrets are jealously kept hidden and copying or
modification is forbidden. Microsoft is obviously the symbol of this
software economy which, according to the American computer scientist,
deprives the user of his freedom. Stallman proposes another path, free
software: programs can be copied for free, anyone can adapt them to
their own needs and modify them. On condition that they pay their own
contributions into the common pot. Rather than relying on the moral
sense of the participants to ensure compliance with these rules, a legal
contract is founded to guarantee the cooperation of all, this is the
General Public License (GPL). In a few years, this curious model with
its utopian appearance takes off: thousands of developers, coordinating
via the Internet, offer dozens of software of this type. In the 90s, the
GNU/Linux operating system, a direct competitor to Microsoft\'s
omnipresent Windows, even began to eat into the company\'s market share.
The phenomenon grew large enough to attract firms hoping to profit from
this model. Because nothing prevents the sale of free software, provided
that its nature as a \"common good\" is respected. Companies like Red
Hat or Suse (now owned by Novell) sell specific versions of Linux, with
boxes, documentation and support. Everyone is nonetheless free to copy
these versions for free. The phenomenon accelerated with IBM\'s
conversion to \"free\" in 1999: the multinational put several billion
dollars on the table and contributed men and money to Linux. Other firms
followed: Sun Microsystems, Novell, then hundreds of start-ups. All are
betting on sources of income other than pure sales: custom adaptation,
maintenance, consulting services, etc. Today, the free software
ecosystem is very diverse: each large-scale project involves volunteers,
company employees, or researchers, spread across the world. Coordination
is ensured by very different structures: the Firefox web browser is
piloted by a foundation, the OpenOffice office suite (word processing,
spreadsheets, etc.) by the Sun company, and the version of Linux, called
Debian, by volunteers. \"This is the characteristic of free software, an
alliance between a cooperative and voluntary economy, the contribution
of States and local authorities with researchers, and companies, without
which it would not exist, or at least to a lesser extent,\" judges
Thierry Noisette. Online agit-prop. This large-scale cooperation does
not happen without problems. Companies are often tempted to privatize
part of the community developments for their own profit or not to make
their own work public. But free software activists, scattered across
hundreds of associations, experienced in online agit-prop and
communication, do not hesitate to fight back. A few days ago, the
FreeSoftwareFoundation association attacked Free, an Internet access
provider that uses free software, accusing the company of not respecting
the terms of the GPL. The company\'s founder, Xavier Niel, had to
publicly fight back. Could free software collapse under the weight of
tensions or the massive influx of money? \"I don\'t think so; on the
other hand, certain specific projects could be threatened, because, in
the event of conflict, companies, with a lot of money, will have more
weight than free electrons,\" believes Perline Noisette. The emergence
of Microsoft in the free software world will undoubtedly serve as a
crash test for the solidity of the model. (1) Editions la Découverte,
2006.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1463

Free Software To be \"free\", software must meet several conditions: its
source code (trade secret) must be public, and users can copy it for
free and modify it to adapt it to their needs. The modifications must be
made public so that the \"community\" can benefit from them. GNU/Linux
GNU/Linux, often called Linux, is the most symbolic of free software:
resulting from the work of Richard Stallman and the Finn Linus Torvalds,
it is an operating system, competing with Microsoft Windows. The Firefox
web browser is another widely used free project, as is the OpenOffice
office suite. Windows Microsoft\'s operating system holds more than 90%
of the market share on individual computers and has often taken
advantage of this ultra-dominant position to fight against competition.
This attitude earned it a condemnation from the European Commission.
Richard Stallman This American computer scientist is at the origin of
the definition of free software, in the mid-80s. At the head of the
FreeSoftwareFoundation, he wants to be the guarantor of the founding
principles of \"free\". 15% The Linux operating system, non-existent in
the 90s, is used by 15% of servers (large computers used by companies).
On personal computers, on the other hand, Microsoft still dominates.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1464

Free software has spawned a large number of descendants: its principles
of the widest possible circulation of creation, modifications open to
all have raised questions since the end of the 90s. What if this model
were applicable to other forms of innovation? With varying degrees of
success and in significantly different ways, projects inspired by the
free software model have flourished: the collaborative and free online
encyclopedia Wikipedia, but also certain scientific works and even
cultural projects for the dissemination of music or audiovisual content.
Sharing. \"The teaching of free software is that we can imagine systems
that encourage the rapid dissemination of knowledge without this
penalizing innovation,\" notes Dominique Foray, an economist at the
Ecole Polytechnique de Lausanne. The success of \"free\" is not
insignificant: until then, the dominant policies favored a logic that
was the opposite of that of sharing. Through patents (on inventions) or
copyright (for works or software), the law guarantees companies that
their creations must not be copied. And that they can therefore make a
financial profit from them and thus continue to innovate. This is the
model applied by Microsoft: to obtain Windows, you have to pay a
license. With free software, it is the opposite: it is about encouraging
copying and cooperation between individuals connected by the Net. The
case of the online encyclopedia Wikipedia is emblematic. This service,
managed by a foundation financed by donations, is open to contributions
from all. Anyone can therefore create or enrich an article on subjects
in which they consider themselves competent. Despite recurring
controversies over the reliability of the information available,
Wikipedia has established itself as one of the most visited sites on the
planet. In biotechnology, some researchers similarly advocate sharing
their innovations rather than protecting them by patents. And there are
defenders of \"free music\", for example in France with the site
Dogmazic. Pitfall. The political motivation of the promoters of these
mechanisms is often a powerful driving force. As Thierry Noisette,
co-author of a book on free software, says, \"each political camp finds
something in it. People on the left, the values of sharing, and economic
liberals, a model of competition\". One pitfall remains: the \"free\"
economic model, applied to areas other than software, is still groping.
Pharmaceutical laboratories rely largely on the defense of their patents
to survive, and almost all cultural industries, music and cinema in the
lead, are based on a model based on the prohibition of copying.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1465

First there was indifference and anathema. And now a half-hearted
embrace. For the second time in a little over ten years, Microsoft is
rallying behind a technological innovation that eludes it and that ends
up threatening its supremacy. In late 1995, Bill Gates, belatedly, wrote
a note entitled \"The Internet Tidal Wave\" and shook up its strategy.
Today, Microsoft is officially taking a step towards Linux, a software
that has established itself as a formidable competitor to Windows, its
flagship product. Once again, the computer giant is adopting this adage:
if you can\'t beat them, join them. Research center. The comparison ends
there. Just as ten years ago Microsoft embraced the Internet, the
agreement with the firm Novell, which coordinates the development of one
of the main versions of Linux, looks more like a peaceful coexistence.
The two companies will cooperate to allow their products to coexist
better within businesses and administrations. The agreement, announced
Thursday, provides for the creation of a joint research center and ends
a patent dispute. Microsoft, moreover, will recommend the Suse version
of Linux to its customers who want to use both systems. New York from
our correspondent It is therefore not a question of converting Windows
to the Linux model, which is opposed in every way. The first is based on
the protection of manufacturing secrets. On the contrary, the free
software model allows any user to tinker with the programming codes to
adapt the software to their needs. More flexible and more economical,
this operating principle has ended up seducing businesses and
administrations. Many IT companies such as Novell and IBM have
understood the revenue they could get from it (read opposite). In 2001,
Microsoft boss Steve Ballmer fought Linux, which he defined in an
interview with the Chicago Sun-Times as \"a cancer that affects the
intellectual property of everything it touches.\" Since then, the
reality principle has gradually prevailed. Microsoft does not hide the
fact that it is primarily a question of responding to the demand of its
customers who want the two systems to coexist. The risk of inaction was
to give up even more ground to its competitor. \"Scepticism\". The
agreement has been greeted with circumspection by Linux promoters.
\"Microsoft has always been hostile to free software, it is natural to
be skeptical,\" believes Daniel Ravicher, legal director of the Software
Freedom Law Center which helps free software developers. According to
him, it will be necessary to ensure that Microsoft respects the rules of
a game to which it has always been a stranger.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1466

The software industry is like religion. When the Microsoft \"Church\"
makes a pact with the rival chapel of free software, there are bound to
be purists who cry heresy. There is, in this much-discussed agreement
between Microsoft and Novell, a strong symbolic dimension that marks a
stage in the brief history of global computing. Here then is the giant
Microsoft, whose CEO, Steve Ballmer, once spoke of a \"cancer\" when he
spoke of the free software Linux of the Finn Linus Torvalds, forced to
deal with this absolute evil that has successfully spread throughout the
world. However, the time has not come for \"conversion\", to stick with
religious vocabulary, but for peaceful coexistence, or, to reintegrate
technical language, for \"interoperability\". The \"free software\"
advocates, that is to say, the free software enthusiasts, should be
delighted by this recognition coming from the Redmond firm, often
accused, particularly in Europe, of seeking dominant positions and
stifling competition. It is an implicit tribute to the success of this
idea, a priori far-fetched in our world which places profit at the heart
of the dominant values, of free access, sharing, and gratuity. The
philosophy which presided over the birth of free software paved the way
for a family which counts among its distant descendants Wikipedia, the
cooperative online encyclopedia for free use, or Firefox, the
independent Internet browser managed by a foundation. However, business
is business, and companies born in the free software movement also need
a viable and sustainable economic model. The agreement between Microsoft
and Novell is therefore the pragmatic recognition of these two worlds
which, despite appearances, have every interest in becoming compatible
rather than engaging in a \"war of religions\" of which the user would
undoubtedly be the first victim.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1467

JUST LAST WEEK, Oracle, the second largest independent software
publisher, announced its intention to join a nonprofit organization
dedicated to promoting Linux. With this announcement, Microsoft\'s most
formidable competitor in computer programs is also trying to create a
solution to compete with Windows. Before the firm headed by Larry
Ellison, Sun Microsystems and IBM tried to lead the revolt. Without much
success with individuals. In the business world, Linux has really
established itself. This program brings intelligence to a computer
equipped with a \"chip\" from Intel, AMD or IBM. The main use of this
program is to run applications on servers, machines that control a
network of computers. Many companies use this program, in particular to
manage e-mail and Internet applications. This software is more stable
and reputed to be more secure than Microsoft\'s Windows. In fact, its
\"safety\" is linked to the fact that all the developers in the world
have access to the source code of the program, that is to say, they have
all the manufacturing secrets, and can ensure that no listening and
encryption measures have been installed without the user\'s knowledge.
And the program, available on the Internet, can be enriched by users
from all over the world. This is how Linux has gained its reputation as
a community program! In fact, there are many commercial versions of
Linux, symbolized by a little penguin who answers to the sweet name of
Tux. The best known is that of the American company Red Hat which has
added, to the Linux kernel, graphical interfaces for the presentation of
programs and small software programs which are used to copy files,
control a printer, etc. There are as many versions of Linux as there are
distributors. One of the most advanced is that developed by Mark
Shuttleworth - who made a fortune by selling his company. This young man
is trying to promote, with his own money, his version of Linux, called
Ubuntu. But no version of Linux is yet easy to use for ordinary mortals.
The program is already used, in rare mobile phones and all the \"boxes\"
to connect to the Internet.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1468

Linux, like OpenOffice, which replaces the Word and Excel office
applications, or the mySQL database, are called \"free\" software. This
term indicates that these programs can be downloaded freely on the
Internet. Their content is entirely available: the source code, the
manufacturing secret, is accessible to all Internet users. These
programs can be copied, exchanged and even modified. But some changes
are not always authorized, especially if a company adds modifications to
then resell its solution. This is the case of the Swedish company mySQL
which is paid through license agreements granted to companies that
modify its database. One of the most widely used free software in the
world is the Internet browsing program Firefox which has several tens of
millions of users.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1469

MICROSOFT and Novell, which distributes a version of the Linux operating
system, entered into a five-year alliance on Thursday evening. The two
competitors will create a bridge between two worlds that are complete
opposites: proprietary computer programs, symbolized by Windows, and
free software, such as Linux. For many years, Steve Ballmer, the CEO of
the Redmond firm, had been multiplying attacks on Linux defenders. But,
faced with pressure from customers, particularly local authorities and
governments that are increasingly leaning toward the competing program,
Microsoft has opened the window to an adversary it knows well. Two years
ago, the software leader paid \$536 million to stop its competitor from
pursuing legal action. Coincidentally, this alliance comes a week after
Microsoft\'s main adversary, Oracle, decided to promote the competing
operating system. Page 21

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1470

There is free software in all areas, from word processing to image
editing and games. To download on the Net: The Framasoft site offers
files and links to download hundreds of software. In particular, you
will find OpenOffice (word processing, spreadsheets, etc.) or Gimp (for
image editing). All of these software programs work with Windows, the
most common operating system on PC computers. www.framasoft.net
Replacing Windows with Linux: It is possible to replace the Windows
operating system with the Linux system. The process requires a minimum
of computer dexterity on the part of the user. Among the most common
versions of Linux, we can mention Red Hat, Mandriva or Suse (which can
also be found in stores with documentation and a support service).

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1471

MICROSOFT and Novell, which distributes a version of the Linux operating
system, entered into a five-year alliance on Thursday evening. The two
competitors will create a bridge between two worlds that are complete
opposites: proprietary computer programs, symbolized by Windows, and
free software, such as Linux. For many years, Steve Ballmer, the CEO of
the Redmond firm, had been multiplying attacks on Linux defenders. But,
faced with pressure from customers, particularly local authorities and
governments that are increasingly leaning toward the competing program,
Microsoft has opened the window to an adversary it knows well. Two years
ago, the software leader paid \$536 million to stop its competitor from
pursuing legal action. Coincidentally, this alliance comes a week after
Microsoft\'s main adversary, Oracle, decided to promote the competing
operating system. Page 21

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1472

Benedict XVI wants to promote the Latin Mass. My priest among the
Latinists. The bishops of France, who are entering a plenary assembly in
Lourdes this Saturday, are opposed to this opening to traditionalists.
Pages 2 to 3 Software makes peace. The giant Microsoft and its rival
Novell, a developer of free software, have concluded an interoperability
agreement that constitutes a turning point for Bill Gates\' company.
Pages 4 and 5.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1473

MICROSOFT, NOVELL Yesterday\'s enemies can become friends. This is the
summary of the strategic alliance formed for five years between
Microsoft and Novell in software. Steve Ballmer, the CEO of the Seattle
giant, and Ron Hovsepian, the president of the American publisher from
Utah, announced a surprising partnership Thursday evening in San
Francisco. The Windows operating system, used by more than 90% of the
world\'s microcomputers, and a version of the competing program Linux
will become \"interoperable\". That is to say, software from both
worlds, those sold under license and so-called \"free\" programs, will
be able to communicate with each other. For many years, however,
Microsoft had been waging war against Linux. In Seattle, in 2000, Steve
Ballmer had even vilified its followers, accusing them of loving
communism! And there was a heavy legal dispute between Microsoft and
Novell. In 2004, to end the lawsuits brought by the latter, the Redmond
giant paid it 536 million dollars. Three years ago, after going through
a difficult financial period, Novell bought Suse Linux. This program is
now driving its sales. Nevertheless, the new ally occupies \"second
place in Linux operating systems, behind Red Hat. But the agreement
could perhaps change our position. Microsoft will suggest to its
customers to acquire SuseLinux\", affirms Tom Francese, sales director
of Novell. For its part, the firm founded by Bill Gates has changed its
tune under pressure from the market. \"Microsoft saw its market share
eroding in server operating systems and in office applications\",
analyzes Tritan Nitot, the president of Mozilla Europe, which advocates
the use of free software. Many customers, particularly in public
services, opt for Linux, reputed to be less expensive to purchase, to
the detriment of Windows and Word and Excel programs. \"This is a legal
and technical guarantee for our customers,\" says Bernard Ourghanlian,
technical director of Microsoft France. Above all, the alliance was
formed because the president of Novell knows the deputy general director
of Microsoft well, at the time when he was its supplier for the Wal-Mart
distribution group.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1474

YESTERDAY enemies, Microsoft and Novell, one of the publishers of Linux
software, are on the way to becoming the best of friends. On Thursday
evening, the two IT groups signed a strategic partnership. And buried a
fifteen-year ideological war. Symbol of resistance to Microsoft
hegemony, Linux was indeed the icon of \"free\" software, in other words
of the technological independence of users. But customers were tired of
this hopeless guerrilla war. They were heard.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1475

FIREFOX Faster and more ergonomic, safer and smarter, the new Firefox
should definitely convince Internet users looking for an efficient
navigation software. Available for Windows, Mac and Linux, Firefox 2.0
stands out with a faster display of Web pages, blocking of pop-up
windows, tabbed navigation, an integrated search area entrusted to
Google or other search tools (Yahoo, Exalead, Wikipedia, etc.), advanced
security settings and customization possibilities. Main new features:
each tab now has its own close button. And if you close one of them
inadvertently, you can recover it using a special command. Better still:
if your computer crashes, Firefox will automatically restore the
configuration you lost the next time you launch it. The software
designers have also thought about new uses of the Web, with an
integrated dictionary allowing you to check spelling before publishing a
blog article or reacting on a forum, or even sending a message on a
Webmail. Along the same lines, when you use the search box, a list of
suggestions appears as you type in the word you want to find. Just as
practical: dynamic bookmarks that let you know immediately when
information has been updated on a website. Already praised for its
security measures, Firefox now offers protection against \"phishing\"
and warns Internet users who might be led to visit a dubious site.
Better still: the software prevents websites from installing a program
on your computer without your permission. Developed by the Mozilla
Foundation, Firefox belongs to the category of free software. This means
very high responsiveness in the event of a problem and very rapid
corrections. An update system automatically checks that the user has the
most recent version and offers to download security patches. Finally,
Firefox\'s customization possibilities are impressive: block ads,
compare prices, monitor the weather or listen to music, not to mention
the modules to completely change the appearance of the browser. Faced
with the innovations of Internet Explorer 7, launched a few days ago,
Firefox must continue to prove that it remains a credible alternative.
It claims 70 million users worldwide and today exceeds 20% of market
share in Europe. - www.mozilla-europe.org/fr/

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1476

THE SMARTPHONE MARKET IS SO SOPHISTICATED THAT MANUFACTURERS NOW PREFER
TO TALK ABOUT \"COMMUNICATING POCKET COMPUTERS\". IT\'S ALL THERE:
OFFICE, ENTERTAINMENT AND COMMUNICATION. THE DEVICES, THEMSELVES, ARE NO
BIGGER THAN A SET OF CARDS. WILL CONVERGENCE FOOLISHERS FINALLY FIND THE
RARE PEARL? RESEARCH INMOTION (RIM) BLACKBERRY PEARL Research in Motion
made no secret of its intention to add multimedia functions to the
already rather loaded arsenal of applications contained in the
Blackberry range of devices. The 8100, also called the \"Blackberry
Pearl\", is the first to inherit them. On the menu, a 1.3 megapixel
camera, which only takes photos, and software applications that allow
you to play music and video clips on the small screen of the wireless
phone. Added to this is a memory card port, of the MicroSD type, useful,
but particularly poorly housed behind the battery of the device. In
addition to office functions, \"push e-mail\" (OLF) and these multimedia
functions, RIM adds to the Pearl the Blackberry Maps application, which
allows it to be paired with an optional GPS receiver, via the Bluetooth
wireless protocol. You get compact and useful satellite guidance,
abroad. At the front, the heart of this Blackberry gives it its name:
the illuminated control key shines a matte white that rightly recalls a
pearl. It is very, very sensitive to touch, a characteristic that you
have to get used to gradually. The rest of the keyboard, meanwhile, is
made up of a minimum of keys and uses the SureType algorithm to guess
manually composed words. Here too, it\'s a little strange at first, but
you eventually get used to it, especially since the word recognition is
close to perfect. As you might expect, it\'s on the multimedia side that
things go wrong. RIM is new to this, which translates into limited
functions. There\'s nothing on the Pearl that you haven\'t already seen
elsewhere. To do it properly, it would have been necessary to add
physical keys to operate the multimedia player, and the ability to make
videos. Another item on the wish list, why not Wi-Fi access, too? If we
had had all that the first time, we would have cried genius. Here, it\'s
far from impressive. RIM Blackberry 8100 Pearl \*\*\* Between \$250 and
\$450 www.rim.com + RIM adds multimedia features to its workhorse:
portable music player, camera and MicroSD memory card slot. - No video
recording, memory card is housed behind the battery and no physical
controls for music playback. In short, poorly designed multimedia
features. PALM TREO 700WX Palm will gradually abandon its Palm OS in
favor of an open-source Linux platform. In the meantime, we have the
Treo 700wx, a versatile device that combines the user-friendliness of
the Treo phone format with Microsoft\'s Windows Mobile 5 operating
system. But a low-resolution screen and high retail price make it less
attractive than some other models. Palm Treo 700wx \*\*\* \$400-\$550
www.palm.com/ca + The Treo 700wx allows for dialing by contact name
(voice or not) and instant retrieval of pushed emails. - The screen
resolution is disappointing. The retail price is unattractive,
especially if you have to commit to a three-year contract. NOKIA E62
Nokia has a wide range of smart devices, but one of the few that is sold
by Canadian vendors is the E62, which looks suspiciously like an
old-generation Blackberry. Powered by the amazing Symbian operating
system, its processor struggles to switch between applications.
Fortunately, its basic functions (telephone and messaging) are of
excellent quality, despite the lack of a camera sensor, a trend that is
more than widespread in the industry. Nokia E62 \* 1/2 Between \$250 and
\$450 www.nokia.ca + Business people eyeing the smartphone market will
get an efficient work companion. - The operating system is slow. The
device does not have a camera. Overall, it is expensive for nothing.
Network Blackberry Pearl: Rogers E62: Rogers Treo 700wx: Bell Operating
Syst. Blackberry Pearl: Blackberry E62: Symbian Treo 700wx: Windows
Mobile Photo/Video Blackberry Pearl: 1.3 MP (photo only) E62: none Treo
700wx: 1.3 MP (photo), VGA (video) Memory Blackberry Pearl: MicroSD E62:
MiniSD Treo 700wx: SD/MMC Other Blackberry Pearl: Bluetooth GPS
Navigator (opt.) E62: Bluetooth Music Player Treo 700wx: Bluetooth
THERE\'S WIRELESS AND WIRELESS More and more manufacturers are going to
include compatibility with Wi-Fi type wireless networks on their
high-end phones. Does the cost of transferring data via cellular waves
make you cringe? Maybe it\'s better to look this way.
alain.mckenna@lapresse.ca

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1477

THE BROWSER Firefox, from the Mozilla Foundation - a community of
developers of free, open and free software - intends to continue to
shake up the monopoly exercised by Microsoft\'s Internet Explorer (IE)
and to gain market share. An update has just been released: Firefox 2.
It includes in particular a spell checker and a system to warn the user
that he is about to enter a website deemed dubious. Created in 2004 by
an international community of contributors, Firefox was launched in the
fall of 2004. It immediately won over Internet users thanks to many
innovations. \"Faced with the supremacy of Internet Explorer, Firefox
represented an important technical alternative,\" explains Mathieu
Llorens, from the Xiti analysis firm. Among the innovations brought by
Firefox 1: tabbed browsing which allows you to open several sites
without restarting the browser each time; a search bar allowing direct
access to Google, for example, without having to type the address of the
site; the possibility for the Internet user, subscribed to a site, to
retrieve article titles on their computer automatically and in real time
without having to go to the site in question. RESPONSE FROM THE WORLD
LEADER \"After the initial media hype, we have seen over the months that
Firefox\'s progress has not slowed down,\" acknowledges Mr. Llorens.
According to Tristan Nitot, president and founder of Mozilla Europe,
Firefox holds 15% of the global market. In Europe, the market share is
around 22%, compared to 77% for Microsoft. In some countries, such as
Slovakia and Poland, the 30% mark has been exceeded. In France, it has
reached almost 20% according to Xiti figures from September. This
breakthrough has led Microsoft to react. \"Firefox has been a good
spur,\" acknowledges Eric Boustouller, CEO of Microsoft France. A week
ago, the world leader in software released Internet Explorer 7. \"We
have brought a lot of innovation and we will not stop there,\" warns Mr.
Boustouller. Microsoft\'s browser now also integrates tabbed browsing,
more security, as well as the ability to open all open sites on a single
page. It remains to be seen whether Microsoft will recover the lost
market share or whether Firefox will continue on its momentum.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1478

As part of the FNC, OpenSource events offer to explore the world of
cinema through workshops, discussions and meetings at the Musée juste
pour rire. On the program, luncheon talks (October 19, 20 and 23),
interactive exhibitions and screenings, etc. Not to mention the first
video iPod battle, a Montreal and world premiere, on Friday, October 20
starting at 10 p.m. at the Musée juste pour rire. Q Where did you get
the idea to organize an iPod battle? A It\'s an idea that came from
Paris, where it was invented by TekiLatex, the leader of TTC (Present at
the last iPod Battle on October 4, Editor\'s note). A friend from
Montreal had participated as a spectator in one of the Parisian
competitions, at Paris Paris, and brought the concept back to Montreal.
The Fly is on the Wall collective organized the iPod battles in
Montreal. I had the idea in mind to do it with a video iPod. Q How does
an iPod video battle take place? A The designers have to prepare their
ammunition. They download videos (on Youtube, for example), on iPod
videos that are lent to them. Each team has its iPod well loaded, and it
is up to the crowd to decide the winner. Some plan to shoot their clips
themselves. There is a lot of preparation to be done, because you have
to anticipate what the other is going to play. Q How is it different
from a \"traditional\" battle? A This is a world first. Here we add the
video element. The participants have carte blanche to choose their
material, but it has to be music. What I find interesting is that there
is the clip aspect and the more difficult path of creating your own
images. Q Who will participate in this video battle? A These are groups
of short films that are invited to come and fight. The organization took
care of finding the teams. Participants come from the world of media,
short films or music videos: Urbania, Kino, Prends ça court, Mange ta
ville or the Grondin brothers. Q Will there be other battles of this
type? A For the Festival du nouveau cinéma, this remains occasional. But
for the Fly Is on the Wall collective, it could be interesting to do
again. Even if the iPod video is less accessible than the iPod audio.
iPod video battle, Just for Laughs Museum, Friday, October 20 starting
at 10 p.m. Free admission. Information: www.nouveaucinema.ca

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1479

After two difficult years, marked by the festival war that shook it like
a plum tree, it was a well-established, regenerated Festival du nouveau
cinéma (FNC) that announced the colours of its edition yesterday at a
press conference at the Just for Laughs Museum in Montreal. With the
Digimart market for new technologies this year in its fold, as well as
the Möbius Festival dedicated to multimedia, it has created new
networks. Institutions have stopped giving it the cold shoulder for
refusing to partner with the defunct FIFM. Patron Daniel Langlois has
wiped out his deficit. The new members of the board of directors,
including producer Denise Robert, are fulfilling their role with
fervour. In short, the swords of Damocles no longer hang over the FNC\'s
head. The distributors who defected last year in favour of the new
festival run by Spectra are back, except for Alliance Atlantis Viva Film
(which was also absent from the FFM). Programming director Claude
Chamberlan says that two heartbreaking films escaped him because of
Alliance\'s rejection. As for FNC general director Bruno Jobin, he
assures us that the event is continuing its development plan and that
the challenge in the future will be to recruit a wider audience by
expanding through a network of larger theaters. For the 35th edition of
the FNC, which will take place from October 18 to 28, 189 films from 39
countries, including 12 world premieres, are on the menu. Claude
Chamberlan, still at the helm of the feature film selection, announces,
as he does every year, his best program. At first glance, it really
seems very good. Between the interesting Congorama by Quebecer Philippe
Falardeau as the opening track and the delicious Volver by Pedro
Almodóvar as the closing, the 35th FNC has concocted an anniversary
edition that is both festive and cinephile. The most anticipated film of
this 35th edition is undoubtedly The Boss of It All, by Lars von Trier,
but Ten Canoes by the Australian Rolf de Heer, Citadelle by Atom Egoyan,
The Island by Pavel Lounguine, Belle toujours by Manoel de Oliveira also
tempt the cinephile. Among the artists expected at the FNC, Olivier
Gourmet, favorite actor of the Dardenne brothers, who plays one of the
heroes of Congoroma, Atom Egoyan and Arsinée Khanjian for Citadelle,
Robert Guédiguian for Le Voyage en Arménie, the veteran Kenneth Anger
for Anger Me, Francisco Vargas for The Violin, etc. The FNC, which
intends above all to present the cream of world cinema, is less
interested in scoops than some competing events and inherits juicy
pieces already awarded elsewhere. Hence the presence in the program of
the Cannes Palme d\'Or, The Wind that Shakes the Barley by Ken Loach,
the Babel directing prize by Inarritu, the Grand Jury Prize Flanders by
Bruno Dumont, the Golden Camera 12:08 East of Bucharest by Corneliu
Porumboiu. Not to mention the Golden Bear of the Berlin Festival
Grbavica by Jasmila Zbanic. These last two feature films land in the
race for the Golden Wolf (first, second or third film), alongside Red
Road by Andrea Arnold (Jury Prize at Cannes), Recherche Victor Pellerin
by Quebecer Sophie Deraspe, in particular. Of note, in the International
Panorama section: the haunting Man Push Cart by Ramin Bahrani and the
provocative Shortbus by John Cameron Mitchell. Focus Québec/Canada
brings together a very large number of national works, including La
Belle Bête by Karim Hussain, based on the novel by Marie-Claire Blais,
Dans les villes by Catherine Martin, Le Fugitif ou les vérités d\'Hassan
by Jean-Daniel Lafond, Rêves de poussière by Laurent Salgues, Sur la
trace d\'Igor Rizzi by Noël Mitrani. The Temps 0 section directed by
Julien Fonfrède will deliver several UFOs, including the opening film in
Canadian premiere, apparently very wild: Paprika, by the Japanese
Satosjhi Kon. Sisters, by Douglas Buck, offers a remake of the film by
Brian De Palma and Taxidermia, by György Palfi, a collection of horrors
for lovers of strong emotions. Among the short films selected: Les Yeux
de ma mère by the Quebecer Michel Lemieux, Workbooks by the Canadian Guy
Maddin, Histoire tragédie avec fin heureuse by the Portuguese Miranda
Pessoa, etc. Retrospectives are part of the celebration, including two
in collaboration with the Cinémathèque québécoise: the complete works of
Norman McLaren restored by the NFB as well as Carlos Saura - Première
époque: 16 films by the Spanish filmmaker made between 1956 and 1979.
Also a tribute to Guy Debord. The complete works of the French filmmaker
and philosopher are presented for the first time in North America. And a
tip of the hat to Swiss filmmaker Daniel Schmid. Three of his films are
on the schedule, including La Paloma. The 35th FNC also includes
exhibitions at the Just for Laughs Museum, including the interactive
Rejouer à pong, a nod to the cult game. The events in the OpenSource
section take the form of speeches, discussion platforms, etc.: luncheon
talks offered by INIS, McLaren OOF, Wapikoni Mobile, etc. In addition,
Kenneth Anger, the cult director of Scorpio Rising, will come to meet
the public and students at Concordia University. And then the team
promises a giant party to celebrate this 35th anniversary in style.
After the turmoil of the last few years, it could, in short, have never
happened.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1480

\"The Best of the Best!\" Programming director Claude Chamberlan summed
up the content of the 35th Festival du nouveau cinéma de Montréal
program. During the 10 days of festivities, from October 18 to 28, film
buffs will be able to feast on a hearty menu, composed of productions
that have already been noticed at the biggest international film
festivals. Congorama by Philippe Falardeau will open on October 18, and
Volver by Pedro Almodovar will close the festivities on the 28th.
Between these two poles, 187 other films and 38 events will have been
presented, grouped into eight different sections: \"International
Selection - Louve d\'or\", \"Special Presentation\", \"International
Panorama\", \"Focus Québec/Canada\", \"Temps 0\", \"Short Films\",
\"Tribute and Retrospective\", as well as \"Events and OpenSource\".
After a year of \"complex transition\", the FNC is thus repositioning
itself as an unmissable event. As for the feature films entered in the
international selection, no fewer than 18 productions will compete for
the Louve d\'or. This will be awarded by a jury composed of Natacha de
la Fouchardière, projectionist/archivist at the Cinémathèque de
Toulouse, Barbra Shrier, producer, and filmmaker Denis Villeneuve. These
include 12:08 East of Bucarest by Corneliu Porumboiu, 13 Tzameti by Gela
Babluani, Away from Her by Sarah Polley, Grbavica by Jasmila Zbanic
(Golden Bear at the Berlin Festival), Red Road by Andrea Arnold, The
Violin by Francisco Vargas and Recherche Victor Pellerin by Sophie
Deraspe. In the \"Special Presentation\" section, Lars von Trier\'s new
film, The Boss of it All, will be screened in North America. The 20
other titles selected in this category evoke a veritable who\'s who of
world cinema. The Wind that Shakes the Barley by Ken Loach (Palme d\'Or
at the Cannes Film Festival) is notably part of this program, as are
Babel by Alejandro Gonzalez Inarritu, Belle toujours by Manoel de
Oliveira, Ces filles-là by Tahani Rached and Citadelle by Atom Egoyan.
Effervescence To highlight the \"effervescence\" of Quebec and Canadian
cinema, a section is also entirely devoted to independent cinema
produced north of the 49th parallel. It includes titles such as Sur la
trace d\'Igor Rizzi by Noël Mitrani (winner of the award for best
Canadian first film at the Toronto Film Festival), La belle bête by
Karim Hussain, Dans les villes by Catherine Martin, Le fugitif ou les
vérités d\'Hassan by Jean-Daniel Lafond and Masturbation libre - le
manifeste by François Gourd. The film-loving public will also have the
opportunity to view the complete works of Norman McLaren and to
discover, for the first time in North America, the complete works of the
filmmaker and philosopher of the \"international situationist\" Guy
Debord. After the now famous \"saga\" of the Montreal festivals, the FNC
team was visibly happy to work this year in a calmer context. \"We can
now rebuild on more solid foundations,\" commented René Malo, the
chairman of the board of directors. The 35th FNC will take place from
October 18 to 28 at Ex-Centris, the Imperial Cinema, the Cinémathèque
québécoise and the Just for Laughs Museum. Info: 514-844-2172, or
www.nouveaucinema.ca

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1481

Montreal - The Best of the Best! Programming director Claude Chamberlan
summarized the content of the 35th Festival du nouveau cinéma de
Montréal program. Over the 10 days, from October 18 to 28, film buffs
will be able to feast on a hefty menu, composed of productions that have
already been noticed at the biggest international film festivals.
Congorama by Philippe Falardeau will open on October 18, and Volver by
Pedro Almodovar will close the festivities on the 28th. Between these
two poles, some 187 other films and 38 events will have been presented,
grouped into eight different sections: Louve d\'or International
Selection, Special Presentation, International Panorama, Focus
Québec-Canada, Temps 0, Short Films, Tribute and Retrospective, as well
as Events and OpenSource. After a year of \"complex transition,\" the
FNC is repositioning itself as an unmissable event. As for the feature
films entered in the international selection, no fewer than 18
productions will compete for the Golden Wolf. Among them, 12: 08 East of
Bucharest by Corneliu Porumboiu, 13 Tzameti by Gela Babluani, Away from
Her by Sarah Polley, Grbavica by Jasmila Zbanic (Golden Bear at the
Berlin Festival), Red Road by Andrea Arnold, The Violin by Francisco
Vargas and Recherche Victor Pellerin by Sophie Deraspe. The Special
Presentation section brings together the most prestigious productions,
directed by renowned creators. Of course, the new film by Lars von
Trier, The Boss of it All, will be presented in North America at the top
of the list. The 20 other titles selected in this category evoke a
veritable who\'s who of world cinema. The Wind that Shakes the Barley by
Ken Loach (Palme d\'Or at the Cannes Film Festival) is part of this
program, as are Babel by Alejandro Gonzalez Inarritu, Belle toujours by
Manoel de Oliveira, Ces filles-là by Tahani Rached and Citadelle by Atom
Egoyan. To highlight the \"effervescence\" of Quebec and Canadian
cinema, a section is also entirely devoted to independent cinema
produced north of the 49th parallel.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1482

The word wiki comes from the Hawaiian expression \"wiki wiki\", commonly
translated as \"quickly\". In the Internet world, it refers to a site
written by several people whose pages can be modified quickly and
freely. Any visitor who appreciates the articles can join the community
that edits it. n The best-known wiki, the Wikipedia encyclopedia
(www.wikipedia.fr), is the most visited in the world. But in the world
of \"wikis\", we also find educational content (a teacher, for example,
who enriches his courses with his colleagues), information and technical
documentation sites (very popular with computer enthusiasts)\... n
Depending on the case, visitors can contribute directly, or only after
registering, so as to be identified when they make an addition or
modification. They then have the possibility of intervening on the
content of the pages, but in no way on the technical aspect of the site.
n To create or edit an article, the visitor connects to the \"wiki\"
editing area with their web browser. They then access a form containing
the text they want to edit. \"Wiki\" articles follow a syntax that
ensures the correct formatting of the document on the Internet, creates
links and places images. Depending on the tool offered, the
corresponding codes must be indicated in the text or special icons must
be used. n The principle of links is at the heart of the \"wiki\": each
document must allow the visitor, by simply clicking on a keyword, to
consult other documents. The author of an article can even create a link
that will lead\... to an empty page, and it is then up to the visitor to
write the corresponding article, if they feel like it. In addition, on
most \"wikis\", a link or tab titled \"Edit\" provides direct access to
the editing tools. n As contributions are made, the pages are enriched.
It is possible to follow their evolution and even to revert to a
previous version. This requires administrative management of the
\"wiki\". In most cases, this is ensured by a committee of users who
monitor the smooth running of operations and can correct or block an
article. Only users with the necessary privileges have the ability to
delete a page or exclude unwanted visitors. n The authors of a modified
page can also check and complete the information added. This mode of
operation also allows attempts at falsification, defamation or
misinformation to be detected and immediately cancelled. One regret,
however: by erasing banalities, approximations, propaganda and
questionable arguments, the content often tends towards consensus. n The
texts of a \"wiki\" must of course be original, free of rights and not
violate any copyright. Once published, they are subject to a license
that is generally inspired by those governing free software: the content
can be freely copied and modified, but any copy or modification must
meet the same conditions of freedom. DS

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1483

A nice move. This is what the leaders of the association Sauvons la
recherche (SLR) achieved last weekend in Fleurance (Gers), by bringing
together several certain or potential candidates (François Bayrou,
Dominique Voynet, Laurent Fabius, Marie-George Buffet, Olivier
Besancenot, Christiane Taubira, France Gamerre) for the presidential
election (1) at its autumn university. Scissors. Press articles and
radio debates kept the flame lit in 2004: scientific research must be
one of the strong subjects of political debate. Beyond the one-off
success, SLR confirmed that it could continue, while its disappearance
seemed programmed after the vote on the research program law in the
spring. A stroke of luck, given the need for a place for discussion
between scientists, politicians and citizens, on the means of research
and higher education as well as on its organization or the economic,
social and cultural future of its discoveries. Scientists have
vigorously contested the idea that the problems raised have been
resolved (see below). They point to a devastating scissor effect between
the massive retirements that are looming and the fall in the number of
people enrolled in science courses at university. \"In 1995, 68,000 new
high school graduates enrolled in science faculties. There were only
43,000 left in 2005.\" To the point that small universities are
considering closing their physics courses after the second year.
Contradiction. A report from the General Inspectorate (2) quantifies
this enormous contradiction. A young doctor in life sciences has only a
10% chance of being recruited as a researcher or academic. The system is
therefore over-selective, eliminating 90% of possible candidates. Young
researchers doing postdoctoral work abroad still have no prospects of
returning to France in public research or business. The stagnation or
reduction in the number of theses will lead in a few years to the
opposite situation: it will be almost enough for the new doctor to be a
candidate to be recruited as a lecturer in chemistry, earth sciences or
life sciences. Recruiting massively, well beyond immediate needs, by
taking advantage of the current pool of young people, constitutes the
only solution to this contradiction. It is still necessary to have the
political courage to implement it without delay. The questions raised by
Voynet on the use of GMOs and nuclear power, or the proposal made by
Buffet of \"citizen forums\" to discuss the use of discoveries, did not
take scientists by surprise. \"In twenty years,\" explained the
historian Dominique Pestre during a debate, \"the cursor that separates
science as a public good from science as a private good has been
brutally shifted in favor of the latter. The patentability of life, and
sometimes even genes, the emergence of public-private conflicts of
interest in laboratories, the collapse of funding for the human and
social sciences\... all this requires that we open up new spaces for
knowledge as a public good, through public forms of intellectual
property, such as free software.\" Hence the need, he stressed, to break
with a condescending vision of the public: \"We just need to explain it
better and they will accept.\" And to denounce illusions: \"Politicians
dangle the prospect of money coming into universities or public labs
through patenting, you should know that in the United States Stanford is
practically the only one to make money in this way, all the others lose
it.\" Theorem. At the same time, the economist Pierre Larrouturou
brilliantly demonstrated that, if a strong ambition for research was
necessary, its justification by the theorem \"research equals jobs\" was
simply not true; it was precisely this theorem that Fabius took up in
front of the scientists. The risk, Larrouturou suggests, \"is that in
ten years we will be told that there is no point in increasing the
research effort since we will not have solved the problem of the four
million unemployed people in this way.\" (1) Libération, September 30
and October 1, 2006. (2) IGAENR 2003 Report.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1484

\"Defeating DRM means becoming aware,\" say the people behind the
website DefectiveByDesign.org, who are orchestrating a campaign to
abolish Digital Rights Management, the protection and digital rights
management measures that, in short, limit the use that can be made of a
song, whether it was purchased on physical media (CD) or in an online
store using such processes. These informed Internet users have therefore
unilaterally declared that tomorrow (October 3) will now be World
Anti-DRM Day. Taking a Disney executive (not named on the DbyD website)
at his word, who declared that \"if consumers learn what DRM is and how
it works, we will have already lost,\" users are invited to inform their
peers of the \"dangers\" of this practice on the freedom of creation and
circulation of cultural works. Demonstrations in preparation for October
3 began last Saturday in New York and London. The New York University
chapter of the national student organization Free Culture, which focuses
on the future of culture, technology, and copyright (as explained on
their wiki), held a demonstration in front of the imposing Apple Store
in Manhattan, distributing information about the majors\' evil plans and
their secret weapon, DRM. A similar demonstration, organized by the
FreeSoftwareFoundation Europe (FSFE), took place in front of the Apple
Store in London. In both demonstrations, participants wore orange-yellow
protective suits, like those worn by responders in bacteriological
disasters! On the DefectiveByDesign website, we learn that about 200
events or demonstrations are already planned around the world, but none
in Montreal for the moment. Let us recall that the debate around
protection measures and digital rights management has been at the center
of many debates and disputes since the hemorrhage of music and video
files on the Web. Sony, for example, had to face justice for having
contaminated the computers of millions of music lovers around the world
who had the misfortune to import the content of an album into their
computer with, without their knowledge, malicious software. In Canada,
artists like Avril Lavigne and Broken Social Scene have joined together
in a coalition that campaigns, among other things, against the use of
DRM. The question of DRM will be the subject of a discussion as part of
the important Future of Music Policy Summit, which will be held Thursday
at McGill University, as part of the Pop Montréal festival.
http://defectivebydesign.org/en/nodehttp://www.freeculturenyu.org/http://www.futureofmusic.org/events/summit06/index.cfm
Palmarès.ca A new Quebec player in the online music file sales market
appeared on the web last Thursday. Palmarès.ca, a platform jointly
founded by Puretracks.ca and Astral Media, is looking to steal a share
of an ever-growing market from iTunes and Archambaultzik.ca, with the
ambition of becoming the number 1 online store in Quebec. Beautiful,
easy-to-use interface, catalog of 1.1 million songs (including a lot of
Quebec repertoire, but don\'t look for the new Jean Leloup since neither
Palmares.ca, nor Archambaultzik, nor iTunes offer it!), prices
comparable to those of competitors, simplified search by musical
categorization - sometimes approximate: what is Daft Punk doing in the
\"trip hop\" subcategory? Caroline Néron\'s album featured in the hip
hop section? Another fun detail: in the site\'s help section, it is
specified that the files are sold with WMA digital rights management
technology, theoretically unreadable by iPod players. However, in its
general information, Palmarès.ca gives you the procedure, as simple as
ABC, to be able to buy their files and then transfer them to your iPod,
without worries: \"When Palmares.ca files are burned to a CD using
Windows Media Player 10, these CDs will be recognized and can be ripped
by iTunes,\" we are informed. Ah, those DRMs, what we wouldn\'t do
without them! www.palmares.ca In bulk\... \> To follow up on our column
from last week, Apple quickly put online a correction to the seventh
version of its iTunes software. Version 7.0.1 of iTunes can be
downloaded here: www.apple.com/itunes/download/ \> The Pop Montréal
festival website offers plenty of good content to get you in the spirit
of the event that begins Wednesday. First, a podcast (PopCast, which
already has 38 episodes!), created by André Péloquin, who also manages
the festival\'s French-language blog. You can consult and download from
www.popmontreal.com. For its part, the Montreal (and bilingual) blog
Midnight Poutine also has its own podcast on the orgy of concerts that
Pop Montreal brings: www.midnightpoutine.ca/ \> Microsoft announced in a
press release that its Zune digital music player would be available in
the United States on November 14. The 30 GB model would be sold for
US\$249.99, a price similar to that of an iPod of the same capacity,
and, above all, much less than the 400 or so initially planned\... The
holiday season will be competitive!

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1485

Is knowledge sharing a utopia, a new buzz word of the international
community? We do not think so. A few examples will speak better than ten
analyses. In 1965, Singapore was covered in slums and its economy was
underdeveloped. Since then, the government has implemented resolute
policies aimed at investing in education, improving skills and
productivity and attracting high value-added industries. Singapore\'s
GDP per capita now exceeds that of many countries in the North. An
economy based on sharing and disseminating knowledge is an opportunity
for emerging countries and the well-being of their populations. Thus,
despite its poverty, the Indian state of Kerala now has a level of human
development close to that of countries in the North: life expectancy is
73 years and the school enrollment rate exceeds 90%. Kerala contributes
greatly to making India the eighth nation in the world in terms of
scientific publications. In 1971, a few thousand migrants settled in a
deserted plain 20 km from Lima and created Villa El Salvador. Relying on
their own strength, its inhabitants set up education centres and created
associations. A courageous participatory and community development
initiative, which relied on women, transformed this shanty town into an
organised city. Recognised as a municipality in 1983, Villa El Salvador
created its university in 1987. Today, 98% of children are educated
there and the adult illiteracy rate (4.5%) is the lowest in the country.
The city now has 400,000 inhabitants, including 15,000 students. The
municipality offers computer access points to citizens, who give their
opinions on the subjects under discussion within the community. Shared
knowledge is therefore a powerful lever in the fight against poverty. It
is also now the key to the production of wealth. Finland, which was hit
by a severe economic crisis after the dissolution of the Soviet Union,
is today held up as an example: it invests almost 4% of its GDP in
research, its education system is ranked top of industrialized countries
by the OECD, and the variation in performance between students and
schools is surprisingly small, which shows that success on the scale of
knowledge societies and economic success can very well be combined with
equity. These examples are far from isolated. In all regions of the
world, a number of countries are inventing new styles of development,
based on knowledge and intelligence. For the development potential of a
society will depend less in the future on its natural resources than on
its capacity to create, disseminate and use knowledge. Can we say,
however, that the 21st century will see the rise of societies of shared
knowledge? Since shared knowledge is a public good that must be
accessible to all, there should be no exclusions in a knowledge society.
But knowledge sharing cannot be reduced to a division of knowledge or
the exchange of a rare resource that nations, societies and individuals
would fight over. In network societies, creativity and the possibilities
for exchange or sharing are multiplied. These societies create an
environment that is particularly conducive to knowledge, innovation,
training and research. The new forms of networked sociability that are
developing on the Internet are horizontal and non-hierarchical,
encouraging cooperation, as is well illustrated by the models of the
\"collaboratory\" in research or \"open source\" software in IT. The
emergence of network societies and the accompanying drop in transaction
costs encourage the rise of new forms of productive organization, based
on exchange and collaboration within the same sharing community. This is
particularly essential in the face of the temptation of economic
warfare: these new practices allow us to hope that we will be able to
find a fair balance between the protection of intellectual property
rights, necessary for innovation, and the promotion of knowledge in the
public domain. However, sharing knowledge cannot be limited to the
creation of new knowledge, the promotion of knowledge in the public
domain or the reduction of the cognitive divide. It implies not only
universal access to knowledge, but also the active participation of each
individual. It will therefore be the key to the democracies of the
future, which should be based on a new type of public space, where
genuine democratic meetings and deliberations involving civil society
will make it possible to address societal problems conceived in
prospective terms. The \"hybrid forums\" and citizens\' conferences
offer a prefiguration of this in some respects. Of course, there are
many obstacles to sharing knowledge! Just as much as the solutions we
are putting forward, they are at the heart of UNESCO\'s global report
\"Towards Knowledge Societies\" directed by Jérôme Bindé and published a
few months ago. The 21st Century Talk that we have just organized at
UNESCO on the theme of knowledge sharing has undoubtedly allowed us to
better identify them: polarization, digital divide and, even more
serious, knowledge divide and inequality between men and women, these
are the main obstacles to knowledge sharing. To overcome these
obstacles, societies will have to invest massively in lifelong education
for all, research, information development, and the rise of \"learning
societies\", and better respect the diversity of cognitive cultures and
local, traditional and indigenous knowledge. Knowledge sharing will not
always be for tomorrow: because it is not the problem, it is the
solution. Knowledge sharing does not divide knowledge: it makes it grow
and multiply. \*Director-General of UNESCO

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1486

Have you heard of Lulu? It is a self-publishing service created by Bob
Young. This Canadian reinvented the software industry by breaking the
monopoly of operating systems and then founding \"Red Hat\", today the
largest \"Open Source\" software company. Lulu uses the Internet to
reduce costs and change the way books are produced and sold. Every week
1300 new works are published on Lulu. Lulu\'s goal is to become a place
of exchange for all digital works: \"While other sites let you sell
everything in your attic, Lulu will allow you to sell everything on your
hard drive, whether it is a book, a song, a photograph, a calendar or
even software\". A million people visit lulu.com every month.
dfessou@lesoleil.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1487

This week the Web helps me Transform my old bathtub into a designer
piece of furniture Recycling is in fashion, and here is a tip for
recovering one of the most unsightly wastes from landfills: used
bathtubs. The Spanish artist collective Trash Formaciones had the idea
of cutting bathtubs into two symmetrical pieces, then gluing them back
to back to create armchairs (cut widthwise) or benches (cut lengthwise).
The cutting should be done properly by a professional, unless your tools
allow you to do it if the bathtub is made of plastic, it is easy. In
addition to their elegant design, the furniture obtained is unbreakable,
difficult to steal and resistant to rain; an ideal choice for outdoors.
Quality of explanations: 3/5 Cool factor: 5/5
http://cocolico.info/2006/06/18/reuse-bathtub NEW MEDIA, NEW ARTISTS
Have you ever heard of \"pixel art\"? This technique, which consists of
drawing point by point with your computer, was the only one that existed
in the early days of computer graphics, and was used in particular by
video game creators in the 80s. In the age of Photoshop, where anyone
can add a hat to their dog or a moustache to their sister in three
clicks of the mouse, artists continue to use this extremely long and
complex method. It must be said that it gives a unique touch to the
drawing, halfway between a child\'s sketch and an architect\'s drawing.
The Taiwanese who created the site lovepixel.idv.tw is undoubtedly one
of the most impressive pixel artists on the entire Internet. A simple
visit to its home page presents you with a bustling city entirely drawn
in pixels, which is 10 times the size of your screen (you will have to
use your scroll bars, because the work is huge!). In any case, this guy
is not idle: he drew each point one by one, each time calculating the
proportions necessary to create his \"false curves\".
www.lovepixel.idv.tw/ (REALLY) FREE SOFTWARE You probably know the
Firefox browser and have heard of Open Office, the free competitor to
Microsoft Office. But they are only the tip of the iceberg that is the
open-source movement. This movement, which brings together an army of
volunteer programmers around the world, offers more and more free
software for Windows and Mac OS X, the quality of which is often
comparable, and sometimes superior, to that of their paid competitors.
The problem is that they don\'t have the same marketing budgets, and
it\'s hard to get information on what\'s out there. Two sites have come
up with the idea of bringing together the best open-source software in
one place, for Windows and Mac OS X respectively. There are some really
little-known software programs that have a lot of potential, like the
Shiira browser or Blender, a cutting-edge 3D modeling software.
www.opensourcemac.org www.opensourcewindows.org THE AUCTION Britney
Spears has eyes bigger than her stomach, which is itself growing visibly
these days. She didn\'t finish the egg sandwich and the pogo stick she
had started at a music industry reception in Los Angeles. A waiter even
rushed to sell these precious leftovers on eBay, specifying that if
Kevin Federline was the real owner of the pogo stick, it was
Britney-the-greedy one who bit into it. Sold vacuum-packed, these two
glorious pieces of trash sold for \$520 US. Moral: never forget to pick
up every cigarette butt behind your favorite star, there will always be
someone who will buy it at full price!

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1488

Tera-10 is one of the \"massively parallel computers\", whose power
comes from the very high-speed interconnection of thousands of
processors backed by a very large central memory. Made up of 544
computing nodes, each with 8 Intel Itanium-2 processors, it uses a
central memory of 30 terabytes and can, with a gigantic storage memory
(one petabyte, or one million billion bytes), exchange at a rate of 100
gigabytes per second. It is assembled by Bull, which provided the
software platform, a million lines of code, under Linux, an open-source
operating system. A surprising return of the Frenchman among the greats
of computing where IBM and HP reign supreme.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1489

(special correspondent in Linz) He must have been pedaling on the spot
for an hour, sweating in his cycling suit. Next to this sporty old man,
a dandy, cigarette in mouth, does the same, although at a slower speed,
a dilettante in a skirt is content with a turn of the wheel. The watts
rise to the rhythm of the cheeks that turn pink under the effort, a
final thrust of the hips and, at 10 p.m., the moon floating above the
central square of Linz lights up, thanks to the energy accumulated by
the strength of the calves of the hundreds of cyclists who took turns
all afternoon. A large human battery that made it possible to light up
the square for\... an hour. Needless to say, it would have taken a lot
of people to supply electricity to the entire Ars Electronica, the
oldest electronic arts festival that is taking place until this evening
in every corner of the Austrian city, including the most unexpected. On
Friday evening, a commando action led by the New Yorkers from the
Graffiti Research Lab (1) transformed the tram into a multi-coloured
garland. An overexcited crowd threw handfuls of light-emitting diodes
(LEDs) attached to batteries and magnets that stuck to the metal
carriages. The GRL hacktivists are proposing an extension of street art
through new technologies (LED Throwies, electrograf, mobile urban
projection): a \"graffiti 2.0\" to compete with commercial signs and
reclaim public space. The approach is \"open source\", encouraging
everyone to make their own tools. A simple and participatory approach in
line with the paradoxical title of this edition, \"Simplicity - the art
of complexity\". \"Isn\'t it strange that we are constantly developing
new technologies that are supposed to simplify our lives and work, and
that in the end we have the impression that everything has become so
much more complicated?\" asks Gerfried Stocker, director of the
festival. For twenty-seven years, he has been examining the impact of
technologies on the arts, culture and society, echoing a growing
technophobia, and more generally the nostalgia for a simpler life. In
this society dominated by technical revolutions and global networks, and
drowning in information, a certain discouragement is growing, the desire
to let go. Or even pounding a hammer on the computer keyboard in anger,
an option also available at the festival with the Sledgehammer Keyboard
installation, where you could literally hit your frustrating experiences
on a giant latex keyboard connected to a screen (2). "Paradox." To guide
the novice on the complex path to simplicity, the Ars had invited the
American guru of digital design, John Maeda, professor at the
prestigious Media Lab of MIT (Massachusetts Institute of Technology).
The artist, who also presented his soothing abstract digital paintings,
Nature, has just released a book, The Laws of Simplicity, compiling his
observations (3). "We are trapped in this paradox, wanting something
that is easy to use, but that does every complex thing imaginable." His
first commandment is "reduce." A recipe that has been successfully
applied by the iPod and Google, as well as Walter Bender, who initiated
the \"One laptop per child\" project, which aims to design a robust and
inexpensive computer (less than \$100), but equipped with all the
essential functions in order to equip the billion school-age children in
developing countries. \"The goal is not to eliminate the complexity of
the world, but to create a tool that allows us to confront it more
simply,\" he noted during the symposium. Complexity is often a question
of point of view. In the basement of the Brucknerhaus, it does not seem
to put off the young people who come to participate in the various
workshops, handling the soldering iron, electronic components and
computer code to create interactive musical instruments or program
software for mobile phones. \"We need to constantly update our
knowledge. The \"Do it yourself\" philosophy, inherited from hacker
culture, is spreading across the Internet and is providing a number of
online guides that are as easy to apply as cooking recipes,\" says
workshop organizer David Cuartielles. Simplicity of access was the
dominant feature of most of the installations presented at the festival.
Visitors could lie down and shiver in Kaffe Mathews\' bed, massaged by
sound vibrations, creating intense sensations and a unique listening
experience. Exonemo combines the ancestral art of folding and the latest
geolocation techniques in his poetic Roadmovie. The same purity is found
in Paul DeMarinis, who revisits the archaeology of communication through
a subtle metaphor in The Messenger, an installation connected to the
Internet that is inspired by the electric telegraph. Emails from all
four corners of the planet are dissected letter by letter by three
fanciful receivers. One consists of 26 chamber pots that spell out the
letters in as many different voices, the second of 26 skeletons hanging
from gibbets wearing ponchos stamped A to Z and who quiver in a
grotesque danse macabre each time a letter is activated. Finally, 26
bottles each containing a metal letter that make bubbles when the
current passes. Impossible to reconstruct or understand the message
transmitted that comes to die here. An ironic reference to the thousands
of insignificant messages that have become our daily lot. Goldfish. This
unenviable fate is also illustrated by the hysterical installation of
the Techart Group, Office Live, which delivers a sarcastic commentary on
repetitive office life. A high-tech \"domino effect\" where the entire
production line is automated and activated by\... a goldfish. To help
festival-goers find peace, Ars Electronica organized a pastoral trip to
the sumptuous baroque monastery of St Florian. Between a Japanese
archery session, an origami workshop and a concert on a stunning
14-string instrument 10 meters long, the audience gave a rock star
welcome to Toshio Iwai, the father of the cult musical game
Electroplankton, a digital magician who presented his new optical
illusion machine Morphovision (4). (1) www.graffitiresearchlab. com (2)
www.taylorhokanson.com (3) www.lawsofsimplicity.com (4)
www.nhk.or.jp/strl/ morphovision www.aec.at/en/festival2006

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1490

Do you remember Fort Boyard, the French TV show adapted for Quebec with
local stars? Yes! So with the Fort Boyard game on CD-Rom, there are all
the tests, puzzles and duels that made the show a success. In each game,
you never know which candidate will be chosen for a given test, which
can play tricks when a stronger or more skilled player is needed and the
host has not chosen the one. And that\'s without counting Father
Fouras\' puzzles, which are not very simple or obvious. You can take
your time to answer, but there are limits. Among the tests, you have to
cross a room while balancing on a barrel, move a barrel from one square
to another while avoiding being trapped, have the best legs at the
capstan, pull up the stones using a pulley, find the three keys
according to their respective shape to open the chest, pass through a
wall by rushing at the right time, cross the room using the strength of
your arms, unbolt a plate while avoiding being hit. So, by winning four
or five tests and answering Father Fouras\' question, the team will
obtain the five keys to access the treasure. But, you still have to
thwart the tests of the master of Darkness to get your friends out of
prison or gain time to collect the treasure. It\'s not always easy.
There is a memory game with colored marbles, a test of strength with
cannonballs to hold at arm\'s length, succeed in hammering in the last
nail, compose the word Boyard by drawing the right cards, find the
boyard hiding under one of the three cups. Then you have to collect
clues in other tests that require strength and skill such as the test of
crossing the fort on a wire, swinging at the right time to catch the
clue, climbing a climbing wall by the right path, climbing a pole by
grabbing cleats. With the clues, you can then compose the word that will
unlock the vault to collect boyards. You have to think carefully
otherwise, not a boyard in your pockets. These boyards allow you to buy
access to quick games to replay the tests that the players have gone
through during the game. This allows you to replay certain more
difficult activities if you want to win the game. As in the real game,
losing a challenge or not leaving the room quickly enough will result in
the participant being imprisoned. Overall, the activities represent
interesting challenges that require skill, thinking, and speed of
execution. The images are interesting. However, the transition between
the game portions is slow and the many black screens can make you grumpy
because of the time lost. These transitions lack fluidity and speed.
However, it remains an interesting game. RATING: \*\*\* PC disk. Minimum
configuration: Pentium 1 GHz, Windows XP Service Pack 2, 256 MB RAM, 3D
graphics card with 64 MB memory, 20 X reader. Publisher: Mindscape.
Suggested price: \$20. Distributor: PMD Logisoft. Reading for the
holidays Computers are not just about software and the machine, there is
also a bit of reading. Here are some suggestions for the coming weeks.
Hacking Forbidden Who hasn\'t heard of \"pirates\", cybervandals?
Nobody. At least, nobody who surfs the Web. Just think of all the spam,
the thousands of viruses and the vicious attacks of all kinds. If you
want to know the techniques that these pirates and evildoers use and
have the means to counter them, you should get your hands on the volume
Hacking Forbidden. It will even allow you to do some exercises on your
computer to check the security, but also to beat the hackers at their
own game. Interesting, but for the exercises, it is better not to be a
computer neophyte. Gomes Urbina, Author Alexandro; Publisher: Micro
Application; 816 Pages; Suggested Price: \$35 Digital Photography Before
going on vacation, you may have bought a digital camera. This fourth
edition of the title Digital Photography could well provide you with
useful tips for taking better photos and for processing them properly
with your computer. The book, very well illustrated, covers the main
tips, pitfalls and solutions to use with a digital camera. It also talks
about software and the possibilities of modifying an image to make it
more interesting. To put in the hands of any budding photographer. By
authors, Collective; Publisher: First Interactive - Poche Visuel; 396
Pages; Suggested Price: \$25 Dark net - Hollywood\'s war against the
digital generation This book will appear on shelves in August. It is a
long analysis of the stakes of the media in the historic turning point
of the digital era, of mass diffusion, but also of personal
interventions in blogs that are changing the role of traditional media.
We are in a battlefield where the technological advent is confronted
with the established order and its immobility. The stakes are high
between piracy and legal copying, between data exchange (P2P), free
software and the holy of holies copyright. A very interesting portrait
of what is happening and could happen in the digital age. D Lasica,
Author J; Publisher: M 2 (Métamorphose Du Xxie Siècle); 316 Pages;
Suggested Price: \$30 In a few clicks In this low-cost collection (\$15)
from the publisher Micro Application, you will discover a series of
useful titles for using your computer and certain software. Each
160-page booklet includes a disk that contains either free software,
shareware or freeware, or even projects to carry out related to your
reading. Here are a few titles: OpenOffice.org 2, Windows XP, Music and
MP3, Troubleshooting and Optimizing Your PC, Your Word 2003 Documents.
NOTE: This column will be on hiatus for the next few weeks. Back on
Monday, September 11. ytherrien@lesoleil.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1491

Yesterday\'s rustic, today\'s chic//The trendy picnic//The packet of
crisps on the grass becomes a political act. In the series, yesterday\'s
rustic becomes today\'s chic, the fashion for ecology restores its
letters of nobility to gardening, hiking and all those activities that
fill our little lungs with air that we would like to be pure. Thus the
picnic, far from the image of Reiser\'s cong\'pé munching on his sausage
sandwich on his checkered tablecloth, which is becoming very fashionable
again. Decoration stores offer delightful wicker baskets where
ultra-design plastic plates are stored, Sagaform has developed a clever
suitcase that transforms into a table, Starck has designed its line of
disposable tableware and Ruinart has just launched a beautiful case to
taste blanc de blanc according to the rules of the art. Once the
accessories have been purchased, all that\'s left to do is click on the
Pique-nique.info website, the first to indicate all the good places to
unwrap your salad in style. And we haven\'t deprived ourselves of it in
recent weeks! Because these lunches on the grass offer a new way to
shake spoons: nearly 22,000 party-goers will have toasted their 46,270
glasses of rosé during the twelve garden parties organized in France by
\"fooding\", these events that have become essential for a new, more
modern, simpler art of living, which also allow for raising some funds
for those who can\'t afford to pay the price and must make do with
humanitarian associations. The strikers at the Desmazières group
warehouse in Lesquin also chose this lovely way to protest against
repeated layoffs and the supporters of undocumented immigrants organised
a \"solidarity picnic\" in Strasbourg for Fatoumada, a Guinean mother of
three, while Parinux, an association promoting Linux and free software,
brought together its supporters in Paris for its two traditional summer
picnics, in the name of freedom and culture for all. Getting out the
packet of crisps on the green grass would almost become a political act
and, since nearly 3 million people gathered for the \"incredible
picnic\" in the year 2000, the organiser, VVM Evénements, wants to make
it an event, entitled \"The Republic is going to picnic on 14 July\".
Its goal: to bring together the 36,000 French municipalities of all
persuasions around the idea of a large popular meeting based on exchange
and sharing, in order to transcend parties and biases. The idea of Gad
Weil, creator of the concept, is that \"everyone will come with food and
drink, planning an extra portion for those who cannot afford to bring
something, and we will sit around a tablecloth decorated in blue, white
and red, with the motto of France, the first verse of La Marseillaise
and the first article of the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the
Citizen written on it.\" This year, a hundred cities participated in
this first, from Paris to Ajaccio, to toast their inhabitants to the
health of the Republic and show that we are well on our plate in this
beautiful country that is France.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1492

Piracy. Your conscience says no, but your wallet says yes. What if you
didn\'t have to choose? For Pierre Bouchard, IT consultant at DMR
Conseil, free software combines the best of both worlds. Less expensive
(or even free) than so-called \"proprietary\" software, such as the
Microsoft Office suite, it is also legal. This software is part of a
philosophy of knowledge sharing. It is the result of the work of a
community of developers who pool their knowledge, as in the case of the
Linux operating system. Since free software does not belong to anyone,
it can therefore be copied and even modified by users. \"For basic
functions, open source software is more than enough,\" believes Mr.
Bouchard. He adds, however, that you need to have some computer
knowledge and know how to navigate the Internet. But you don\'t need to
be a genius. One small problem: sometimes some programs are not
compatible. And what about security? These software programs would be as
secure, if not more secure, than the most widely used proprietary
software (under Windows), Mr. Bouchard suggests. Why? Precisely because
they are less popular: those who create viruses seek to infect as many
users as possible. For more information: www. opensource.org

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1493

The day he received \$575 million from the sale of his company, he
immediately spent about twenty of it to go into space aboard a Soyuz
with the Russian Yuri Gidzenko and the Italian Roberto Vittori. Two
short trips around the Earth and then to the International Space Station
(ISS). That was in 2002. South African Mark Shuttleworth, 28 at the
time, became the second space tourist, after the American Dennis Tito.
Although the word tourist triggered protests in him, followed by
multiple anecdotes about his months of training in Star City, Moscow,
the centrifuges, the abuse of the doctors who had \"taken care of
Gagarin\"\... He says: \"It was really hard. One morning, I arrived
after a sleepless night spent drinking. The nurse yelled at me and gave
me a beating.\" Today, Shuttleworth is 32 years old and has short hair,
wears a T-shirt and a Brazilian bracelet, but he certainly does not want
to be seen as a young, super-rich wanker. He bombards his interlocutor
with the words \"challenge\", \"will\", \"effort\" and \"boundaries\". A
multimillionaire from the barge years of the new economy before heading
for the stars, he is now piloting the design of a version of the free
software Linux, called Ubuntu, a Bantu word evoking humanity and
sharing. From a micro-office apartment in London, he employs 55 people
in 17 countries and has invested a wheelbarrow of millions. With the
idea not of inflating an already overflowing bank account, but of
realizing a \"dream\": good software distributed free of charge
throughout the world as a \"common good\". And a \"reasonable\" levy on
the trade in services and aid to businesses to ensure the balance of the
project. Shuttleworth does not skimp on maxims. In a serious tone, he
says: \"Opulence creates responsibility.\" He is reluctant to mention
his only real outward sign of money: a private plane that he \"had
trouble using until \[he\] worked hard.\" And he conveniently calls on
his parents, who \"taught him the value of effort,\" to justify this
side of his struggle to enjoy wealth. He was born in Welkom, a mining
town in the heart of the goldfields of the Orange Free State in South
Africa. His father is a surgeon, his mother a teacher. His childhood and
adolescence were spent in a white suburb of Cape Town, with no politics
at the family meal. It was on the rugby fields that Shuttleworth would
experience the end of apartheid: enrolled in a private school where he
encountered a few blacks from wealthy families, he would see it
transform into an entrenched camp of whites, at the rate at which they
fled the public schools that had become mixed. \"Every year, we played
rugby with the same schools, and the team colours changed,\" he says,
recalling an \"extraordinary\" period. He avoided politics and devoted
himself to his studies, without brilliance. In the family garage, he
began to develop software for the security of transactions via the
Internet. \"Around the sewing machines, it was very comfortable. I had
my mother\'s dishes and her love.\" Four years later, the American
Verisign approached him and put up \$575 million to take over the
business. \"A strange experience\", in the middle of the Internet
bubble, \"which I never believed in\". \"I knew it was a unique
moment\", he says. Shuttleworth launched a foundation to help
computerise schools in Africa. He opened a venture capital fund. Then
this boy with the strangely predestined name (\"worth the shuttle\", in
French) flew to Moscow, a few months after Dennis Tito, to find a return
ticket to space. \"I did three weeks of medical tests in old Russian
military hospitals. It was horrible. But I put myself in a position to
become an astronaut: if it meant spending hours in a dingy room, I would
do it.\" He got his ticket to space for \"an official price of 20
million\" dollars. In Star City, he learned Russian, worked on flight
techniques (\"I had a real role to play\"), and met Belgian astronaut
Franck De Winne and future French minister Claudie Haigneré. He made
friends with some of the astronauts, but was hostile to others who did
not appreciate \"this little 28-year-old shit who thinks he can do what
\[they\] spent 20 years learning.\" Shuttleworth does not see this as a
debate about privatizing space travel, but simply an opposition to
\"change.\" A term that punctuates his speech and that he uses as a
synonym for the triumph of individual initiative and globalization, as
others chant the word \"reform\" to evoke the disappearance of social
protections. At the end of April 2002, in Baikonur (Kazakhstan), he
discovers the half-collapsed buildings, 300 people crowded \"haphazardly
on the launch pad\", this \"immense\" rocket. Takeoff. \"It\'s violent,
it\'s noisy. But you see the Earth through the window and you realize
that it\'s real,\" he says. Two Earth orbits, and he floats in the
cabin. Before joining the space station and three other exiles from the
cosmos for eight days of scientific work. When he talks about his space
fix, Shuttleworth changes his tone. He sits up in his chair, stops
looking at his watch. Then lowers his voice at the end of the story:
\"Afterwards, I did nothing for several months. I had to get space out
of my mind. Everyone defined me by this trip. It took me a while to wash
away this experience that changed my view of the world.\" But not his
bursts of pride, or even omnipotence. Shuttleworth defines himself as
\"fundamentally unmarriageable, because I can\'t devote myself to more
than one thing at a time, and all my heroes have been terrible
fathers.\" His pocket pantheon includes Mandela and Clinton, \"for their
exceptional leadership.\" He has just finished a biography of Atatürk,
to understand \"how people in charge behave in times of great change.\"
Obsessed with destiny, he once found the ideas of Ayn Rand, an American
theorist of radical individualism and the abolition of the State, \"very
seductive.\" In France, where the adjective \"ultraliberal\" is easily
used, Rand could be described as overliberal. But Shuttleworth claims to
have come back from it having \"learned tolerance for people who don\'t
want to change.\" He says he understood, especially while traveling
across Africa for his foundation, that \"a purely individualistic
society is a very aggressive society.\" And now rejects this political
philosophy that speaks \"only of performance and excitement.\" And never
of happiness. photo Michael Grieve Mark Shuttleworth in 5 dates
September 1973: Born in Welkom (South Africa). 1995: Founds Thawte.
1999: Sells Thawte to Verisign for \$575 million. April 25, 2002: Takes
off for the ISS aboard a Soyuz. June 2006: Latest version of the free
software Ubuntu.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1494

Life science companies Monsanto, Syngenta, Bayer, Pioneer, etc. have
been saying for years that genetically modified organisms (GMOs)
represent the next great scientific and technological revolution in
agriculture and are the only effective and cheap way to feed the
ever-expanding population of an ever-shrinking planet. Non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), starting with my own, The Foundation on Economic
Trends, are presented as the \"villains\" in this agricultural drama: by
opposing GMOs, these new Luddites would constantly hinder progress.
Today, in a rather ironic reversal of the situation, the newest
technologies are making genetic manipulation and transgenic crops appear
as outdated techniques, obstacles to scientific progress. This new
horizon of research is called \"genomics,\" and the new biotechnology is
called marker-assisted selection (MAS). It is a complex method that
allows for the acceleration of traditional selective breeding. A growing
number of researchers believe that this MAS, which has already been
introduced on the market, will ultimately replace GMOs. Environmental
organizations such as Greenpeace, which have long opposed GMO crops,
have given cautious support to MAS technology. Rapidly increasing
information about plant genomes allows scientists to identify the
genetic determinants of interesting agronomic traits and the varieties
that carry these genes. Instead of resorting to manipulation to transfer
a gene between two unrelated species to increase yield, disease
resistance, or nutritional capacity, scientists use marker-assisted
selection to identify desired traits in other varieties (or in wild
plants of the same family) before crossing them with commercial
varieties to improve them. With MAS, reproduction remains within the
same species, which, at the same time, greatly reduces the ecological or
health risks associated with transgenic research. While MAS is emerging
as a promising agricultural technology with enormous potential benefits,
the limitations of transgenic technology are becoming increasingly
apparent. Most transgenic crops introduced into the field meet only two
objectives: insect resistance and herbicide tolerance. They often rely
on the expression of a single gene: this is far from the great
agricultural revolution that life science companies promised at the
beginning of the GMO era. Of course, MAS researchers insist that much
work remains to be done before we understand all the interactions
between single genetic markers, complex genetic phenomena and
environmental factors: all of which impact plant development and can
produce interesting results in terms of yield or drought resistance.
Enthusiasm must be accompanied by caution. MAS will only be of value if
it is used as part of a broader agroecological approach. The
introduction of new varieties must be integrated into a set of
environmental, economic and social considerations: it is the set that
will determine the \"sustainability\" of agriculture. The problem is
that the continuation of GMOs risks contaminating existing plant
varieties and making the use of MAS technology more difficult. A major
study conducted in 2004 by the Union of Concerned Scientists showed that
non-GMO crops of three of the major US crops - corn, soybeans and
canola - have already been \"largely contaminated\" by other genetically
modified varieties. \"Cleaning up\" these contaminated crops is likely
to be as difficult and expensive as cleaning up computer software from
viruses. Over the next decade, MAS technology will become increasingly
cheaper and easier to use; knowledge of genomics will become more
widespread. Plant breeders around the world will be able to share more
and more information and democratize the technology. Already they are
talking about open-source genomics: they envision sharing genes in the
same way that Linux and other information technology companies share
software. The battle between a young generation of sustainable
agriculture enthusiasts willing to share their genetic information and
entrenched scientists determined to maintain control over the world\'s
seed stock through patent protection will be tough, especially in the
developing world. In this battle, marker-assisted breeding, if used
wisely, may be the technology that comes at the right time. Jeremy
Rifkin, economist, president of the Foundation on Economic Trends in
Washington, DC. Author of The End of Work (1996) and The Biotech Century
(1998).

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1495

By shelving the theme of the \"social divide\" to replace it with the
more high-tech one of the \"digital divide\", Chirac\'s hobby horse
since 2002, the government is allowing itself the luxury of some nice
announcements. We remember the \"student micro-portable\" scheme
launched by the Raffarin government. The slogan \"a computer for the
price of a coffee a day\" had hit the mark. And produced some results
(see below). Now, for the relaunch, Dominique de Villepin, who will
emerge from his hood, at the beginning of 2007, a computer, a high-speed
Internet connection and hours of training, all for one euro a day for
three years. Offer reserved for families on low incomes, whose loans
will be guaranteed by the State. Only the broad outlines of this formula
were revealed at an interministerial committee for the information
society on Tuesday. Is this offer worth the cost? One euro per day for
three years, the calculation is quick: households attracted by the
formula will borrow 1,095 euros from partner banks. Knowing that the
Internet connection will not exceed 15 euros per month (540 euros in
total), the computer alone (plus the training pack) will therefore cost
545 euros. Much cheaper than in stores? Bernard Lang, one of the
founders of the French-speaking Association of Free Software Users
(Aful), is skeptical: \"You can find perfectly acceptable computers for
400 euros.\" Already in 2004, when the laptop for 1 euro per day for
students was launched, Aful estimated that \"the State had obtained
nothing significant from computer manufacturers.\" \"These are roughly
market prices,\" adds Michel Briand, president of Créatif, an
association that campaigns for the dissemination of new technologies to
local authorities. I cannot understand why free software solutions are
not promoted, when these tools work extremely well and often for a low
price.\" The costs of an operating system represent between 20 and 30%
of the total price of a computer. Michel Briand nevertheless
acknowledges that the formula proposed by the government can be
considered \"practical\". This is indeed the hobby horse of the Internet
Usage Delegation (DUI), which is piloting the operation. \"We decided to
offer new, entry-level equipment, not low-end,\" assures Benoît Fillard,
its director. \"We did not seek to lower prices as much as possible, but
to find the best quality/price ratio.\" He also assures that \"putting
manufacturers in competition should make it possible to offer prices 15
to 20% lower than those on the market.\" Will this offer reach families
with the lowest incomes? The income ceiling for eligible families has
not been set. The criteria selected could correspond to those of the
social electricity tariff (annual resources less than 5,520 euros). The
formula would then concern between 1 and 1.5 million people. Today,
according to the Research Center for the Study and Observation of Living
Conditions (Credoc), one in two households does not have a computer and
less than 40%, or 25 million French people, are connected to the
Internet at home. \"Hardware access to a computer is very important
because studies show that price remains the main factor blocking
purchase,\" notes Régis Bigaud, researcher at Credoc, before adding: \"A
euro per day is still super expensive, not everyone can afford it,
despite the spread of the expense over time.\" Benoît Fillard then dots
the \"i\'s\". \"We thought about using recycled or second-hand
computers, but that made it look like a poor man\'s computer. So, it\'s
true, our offer will not be accessible to everyone. We are not forcing
anyone to buy a computer, but we are offering a solution for those who
are willing to make the effort; because it is an effort.\" Is individual
access to the Internet the best way to reduce the digital divide? \"We
need to go beyond cost reduction and develop collective solutions,\"
says Michel Briand. Like these social housing tenants in Moulins
(Allier), who have been connected since 2003 via their television thanks
to the work of the social housing office. \"There is a need for local
work to support people who are furthest removed from computers, that is,
from writing. Support through a hotline is necessary but not
sufficient.\" Exactly, acknowledges the DUI, which insists on the
training and support that users will benefit from. Without specifying
the terms and conditions. On the other hand, it disagrees with the idea
of collective solutions. \"Look at digital public spaces: there are
nearly 3,000 of them, where the Internet is freely accessible, but they
only reach 3 to 5% of the population. We also defend collective
solutions, but they are not the most suitable for allowing mass access
to new technologies.\" Benoît Fillard, who defends his projects tooth
and nail, knows that he does not always convince: \"Our proposals will
get everyone moving, including those who are against them. It will tease
them and push them to make alternative proposals.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1496

The \"micro-student laptop\" offer, launched with great publicity in
September 2004, was \"not far from being a scam\", complains Bernard
Lang, co-founder of Aful, who criticizes the prices being too high and
the absence of free software, some of which is free. \"The prices
obtained by the State were 15 to 20% lower than those on the market\",
retorts the delegation for Internet usage (DUI). The aim of the
operation was not to provide entry-level prices but to encourage the
purchase of a laptop with \"good value for money\". A successful bet,
according to the DUI. In total, 500,000 to 550,000 laptops were
purchased thanks to the scheme (out of a total of 2.5 million students)
and nearly a third of students are equipped with a laptop (compared to
8% in 2004). It should also be remembered that the loan (30 euros per
month to be repaid) was only taken out by 20 to 25% of buyers. These
figures prove both the student union UNEF right, which denounces a
\"publicity stunt\", and the government right, which wanted students to
equip themselves (by relying on the \"student micro-portable\" label)
without dipping too much into the National Education budget. For
2005-2006, the forecast budget was 5.1 million euros, of which 1 million
was provided by the ministry. In 2004-2005, the State paid 1.7 million
euros for the equipment of WiFi terminals at places of study,
universities 4 million. There are 5,000 of them, which allow free
connection.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1497

A very violent diatribe against free software and its economy appeared
here recently (Libération, July 5, 2006). Its author, through his
deliberate clumsiness and bias, has discredited himself. It is therefore
not necessarily necessary to respond point by point to this attack.
However, it seems interesting to re-establish some truths about the
formidable dynamics of the free software market, its importance for
France and Europe, and to study the procrastination of these lobbies
that do not even have the courage of their opinions and prefer to
advance in disguise. In the great global economic competition, one of
the last sectors where France can still play a leading role is that of
the knowledge economy. Everyone agrees on this point. However, we have
lost, against the United States and the BRIC (Brazil, Russia, India,
China), most of the technological and economic battles in this sector.
The only area where France still has a chance of maintaining a
leadership position is that of free software. Maintain, because, until
now, France has been able to develop know-how and a free software
industry that makes it a serious contender for the role of leader in
this area. But this state of grace is disappearing. The current
government is no longer playing its role, and strategic choices in
administrations are being called into question by increasingly
well-organized lobbies. Furthermore, and as if by chance, certain public
positions are raising awareness among decision-makers and the general
public, as we suspect was the case for this column, which aimed to
attack the free software economy. The most important thing for \"them\"
is not to tell the truth; the most important thing is to maintain their
monopoly situation. It is only in Europe, and particularly in France,
that questions still remain about the reality of a free software
economy. The great movement of development of its industry is happening
elsewhere, and in particular (once again) in the United States. There,
they have understood that the new battle that is beginning is that of
the free market. In a very pragmatic way, the public sector supports the
research and development effort, the major players in IT and electronics
invest in the free communities, start-ups become global players (Red
Hat), while the order givers choose these solutions. All those who call
for innovation and value creation should meditate on the example of the
company Jboss which, in less than four years, has established itself as
one of the leaders in application servers alongside giants like IBM and
which has just sold itself for 420 million dollars, almost 20 times its
turnover. It has been a long time since we have seen such high valuation
levels. This example is not an isolated case. In Silicon Valley, over
the last twenty-four months, 500 million euros have been raised by less
than 50 companies. American investors, for their part, have long
understood that there is no myth about free software being free and that
it is simply the market of the future. So why on earth do we still have
to fight in France to make people understand that free software carries
the growth of tomorrow? Even Microsoft recently started doing open
source, or at least financing it\... In the United States, they don\'t
hide it, but I have never heard one of their representatives say it
publicly in France\... They could have said it at \"Paris, capital of
free software\", which was held on June 26th. They had been invited.
They preferred to decline the invitation, to avoid the debate. What a
shame! Most of the software industry joined in this event. In addition
to the trade union, Syntec, representing all service providers and
publishers, the big names in IT (Cap Gemini, Steria, Thales, Bull,
Oracle, IBM, Sun, etc.) and the free software players in France had all
met to think together about the economic, industrial and political
issues of free software. It was very far from a gathering of
\"libertarian\" players. On the contrary, we talked about the market,
growth, innovation, jobs. These are perhaps the subjects that frightened
the few players who \"boycotted\" this event. But, in this case, let\'s
ask ourselves the right questions: who are those who have nothing to
hide and who accept public debate, and who are those who advance in
disguise and refuse to argue? Who should be listened to and heard by the
public authorities? The major global publishers are now advancing behind
so-called expert and independent front men or behind small associations
and are trying to make people believe that France can still hope to see
a new Microsoft emerge one day. We have only been waiting for
twenty-five years\... Let\'s be clear: the day we have new world
leaders, they will necessarily be players in the free software sector.
So, let\'s not wait five years to launch the \"Quaero du libre\" \[a
Franco-German multimedia project, editor\'s note\]. We must create our
\"OpenSource Valley\" and we must be one of the world leaders in this
dynamic market which will represent, in 2009, 88 billion dollars,
according to Gartner \[a center for analysis of new technologies,
editor\'s note\], or more than 20% of the global market for licenses and
services. Freedom in computing is not just a concept or a philosophy.
There is, alongside the phenomenon of free software, a market. From an
economic point of view, free software therefore represents above all
jobs, innovation and the creation of value. In less than five years, in
France, this sector has created 10,000 jobs. At this rate, free software
will represent more than 60,000 jobs in France in 2010\... If only we
were allowed to do so! Alexandre Zapolsky, president of the Association
of Free Software Service Companies, organizer of \"Paris, Free Software
Capital\".

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1498

A very violent diatribe against free software and its economy appeared
here recently (Libération, July 5, 2006). Its author, through his
deliberate clumsiness and bias, has discredited himself. It is therefore
not necessarily necessary to respond point by point to this attack.
However, it seems interesting to re-establish some truths about the
formidable dynamics of the free software market, its importance for
France and Europe, and to study the procrastination of these lobbies
that do not even have the courage of their opinions and prefer to
advance in disguise. In the great global economic competition, one of
the last sectors where France can still play a leading role is that of
the knowledge economy. Everyone agrees on this point. However, we have
lost, against the United States and the BRIC (Brazil, Russia, India,
China), most of the technological and economic battles in this sector.
The only area where France still has a chance of maintaining a
leadership position is that of free software. Maintain, because, until
now, France has been able to develop know-how and a free software
industry that makes it a serious contender for the role of leader in
this area. But this state of grace is disappearing. The current
government is no longer playing its role, and strategic choices in
administrations are being called into question by increasingly
well-organized lobbies. Furthermore, and as if by chance, certain public
positions are raising awareness among decision-makers and the general
public, as we suspect was the case for this column, which aimed to
attack the free software economy. The most important thing for \"them\"
is not to tell the truth; the most important thing is to maintain their
monopoly situation. It is only in Europe, and particularly in France,
that questions still remain about the reality of a free software
economy. The great movement of development of its industry is happening
elsewhere, and in particular (once again) in the United States. There,
they have understood that the new battle that is beginning is that of
the free market. In a very pragmatic way, the public sector supports the
research and development effort, the major players in IT and electronics
invest in the free communities, start-ups become global players (Red
Hat), while the order givers choose these solutions. All those who call
for innovation and value creation should meditate on the example of the
company Jboss which, in less than four years, has established itself as
one of the leaders in application servers alongside giants like IBM and
which has just sold itself for 420 million dollars, almost 20 times its
turnover. It has been a long time since we have seen such high valuation
levels. This example is not an isolated case. In Silicon Valley, over
the last twenty-four months, 500 million euros have been raised by less
than 50 companies. American investors, for their part, have long
understood that there is no myth about free software being free and that
it is simply the market of the future. So why on earth do we still have
to fight in France to make people understand that free software carries
the growth of tomorrow? Even Microsoft recently started doing open
source, or at least financing it\... In the United States, they don\'t
hide it, but I have never heard one of their representatives say it
publicly in France\... They could have said it at \"Paris, capital of
free software\", which was held on June 26th. They had been invited.
They preferred to decline the invitation, to avoid the debate. What a
shame! Most of the software industry joined in this event. In addition
to the trade union, Syntec, representing all service providers and
publishers, the big names in IT (Cap Gemini, Steria, Thales, Bull,
Oracle, IBM, Sun, etc.) and the free software players in France had all
met to think together about the economic, industrial and political
issues of free software. It was very far from a gathering of
\"libertarian\" players. On the contrary, we talked about the market,
growth, innovation, jobs. These are perhaps the subjects that frightened
the few players who \"boycotted\" this event. But, in this case, let\'s
ask ourselves the right questions: who are those who have nothing to
hide and who accept public debate, and who are those who advance in
disguise and refuse to argue? Who should be listened to and heard by the
public authorities? The major global publishers are now advancing behind
so-called expert and independent front men or behind small associations
and are trying to make people believe that France can still hope to see
a new Microsoft emerge one day. We have only been waiting for
twenty-five years\... Let\'s be clear: the day we have new world
leaders, they will necessarily be players in the free software sector.
So, let\'s not wait five years to launch the \"Quaero du libre\" \[a
Franco-German multimedia project, editor\'s note\]. We must create our
\"OpenSource Valley\" and we must be one of the world leaders in this
dynamic market which will represent, in 2009, 88 billion dollars,
according to Gartner \[a center for analysis of new technologies,
editor\'s note\], or more than 20% of the global market for licenses and
services. Freedom in computing is not just a concept or a philosophy.
There is, alongside the phenomenon of free software, a market. From an
economic point of view, free software therefore represents above all
jobs, innovation and the creation of value. In less than five years, in
France, this sector has created 10,000 jobs. At this rate, free software
will represent more than 60,000 jobs in France in 2010\... If only we
were allowed to do so! Alexandre Zapolsky, president of the Association
of Free Software Service Companies, organizer of \"Paris, Free Software
Capital\".

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1499

I would like to point out that Bill Gates\' intention through his
charity is not obscure: it is the result of a desire to disseminate
Microsoft software. The Gates Foundation\'s \"education promotion\"
consists of giving away computers that will only accept Microsoft
hardware. The capitalist logic of expansion, profit and competition did
not disappear following a speech by members of the business class. For
the record, an African country had to replace computers using free
software installed by a locally established community organization in
order to make room for Microsoft computers. \"Partnerships with
governments\" and the like then look more like a collusion of interests.
It seems to me somewhat utopian to blindly praise a large private
entrepreneur who is also known for his use of unfair competitive
tactics. Making countries that are bled dry (the West also bears some
responsibility for this situation) even more dependent on the North does
not constitute \"philanthro-capitalism.\" For Western capitalists, it is
simply a matter of taking advantage of the North\'s comparative
advantage and opening up the markets of the South to the information
society economy by developing only infrastructure while refusing to open
the file on the asymmetry of information flows, which have stagnated
since the defunct NOMIC project put forward at the UN by the non-aligned
countries during the Cold War. Nancy Turgeon: Political science student
at UQAM, Montreal, July 6, 2006

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1500

On June 26, the Paris City Hall hosted the \"Paris Capitale du Libre\"
event. Thus, the libertarian myth of open source software, improperly
called \"free\", now aims, beyond expert circles, to win the hearts of
the general public. Riding the fashionable theme of community freeware,
it sends a message to everyone: IT should not be inserted into the
economy, it is one more freedom and nothing else. This discourse is a
bad blow to access to IT for the greatest number, a dangerous
misinterpretation for the European and French software industry, a real
incentive to relocate IT services outside Europe. The opening of
computer codes can be useful for research, and community work can
sometimes contribute to certain technological progress; but can we
sustainably ignore economic issues and in particular put ourselves on
the sidelines of intellectual property law? Is there really a future for
a \"libertarian altercomputing\" where creative work would be free? Is
freedom reduced to free? The principle of intellectual property is one
of the foundations of our democracies and our economies, which must be
guaranteed and protected. The Charter of Fundamental Rights of the
European Union and the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the
Citizen solemnly recall this. Calling this principle into question is
suicidal in a context of increased global competition. However, the
words of R. Stallman, the self-proclaimed pope of free software, are
edifying in this respect: \"Proprietary software is immoral and must not
exist\...\" To the question: \"How can companies developing free
software make a living from their programs?\" He even made the following
historic statement: \"This question does not interest me, I am against
the market society\...\" If Europe and France want to have a software
industry, which generates the income and jobs of tomorrow, it is
necessary, on the contrary, to strengthen its foundations and allow the
development of production capacities for these new \"works of the
mind\". A programmer who invents solutions has the right to be
remunerated accordingly by the marketing of his invention. He is not
obliged to share them. It is therefore urgent to protect the works of
the mind that are software, in France and in Europe. The commercial
reality of the \"open source software\" industry is simple: instead of
predictable software equipment expenditure, allowing the controlled
depreciation of major investments, it shifts the expenditure to the
services necessary for the \"tinkering\" of \"open source\" software.
Experience shows that these expenses give rise to multiple extensions,
since the fruit of this work is not \"stabilized\", and does not fit
into a normal economic relationship that guarantees its legal and
operational security. This is how the French Ministry of Finance has
just proudly signed the largest contract in the world for IT maintenance
on open source software, for an amount of 39 million euros. Which makes
this \"free software\" the most expensive software in history! Let\'s
pass it on to Parliament and the Court of Auditors who will assess, over
time, the relevance of the experience. \"Free\" software is therefore
not really free. Driven by IT service multinationals, large consumers of
maintenance and development credits, \"open source\" is now targeting
public administrations, very convenient cash cows in a sector where
competition is fierce. It would be naive for administrations to think
that they are gaining independence from software publishers when they
are much more dependent on service companies. From one dependency to the
other, everyone will choose. But preferring the solution that hinders
the development of a genuine European software industry is very unwise.
Prioritising service over creation is like choosing to build petrol
stations and ignoring the automobile industry. Preferring services also
means encouraging offshoring. Software creation activity is based on
research and can therefore be more \"fixed\" to a territory. IT services
activity can be carried out anywhere, especially where labour is less
expensive. IBM, for example, announced in July 2005 that it was hiring
14,000 people in India at the same time as its European social plans.
But it has no similar project on the software publishing side because
\"moving software design factories is very difficult\". Furthermore,
computer security has become a considerable issue in our societies. We
need well-defined, known, guaranteed products that engage the
responsibility of stable economic players. We owe citizens the security
of exchanges on the Internet. This requires increasingly sophisticated
processes, which are very expensive, and can only be financed by real
publishers who then know how to market them for the benefit of the
greatest number. The real challenge to be met is that of the widest
possible diffusion of IT in our economy to increase its competitiveness
and performance. In particular, in small and medium-sized businesses.
Under these conditions, promoting software that is free only in name is
a bad economic action. No intellectual work is free and all work
deserves a salary. Let us not let ourselves be carried away by the
ultra-libertarian fashion in areas as strategic as the software
industry. This would mean sacrificing the knowledge economy for the sake
of a supposed freedom that risks the death of our industries of the
future. Behind the illusions, the reality would be much less beautiful.
Jean-Dominique Giuliani, president of the Robert Schuman Foundation,
member of the Internet Advisory Board. Latest published work:
l\'Elargissement de l\'Europe, PUF 2005.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1501

A penguin storming the Stock Exchange, quite a symbol. It was indeed a
giant version of the mascot of Linux, the famous free operating system,
that welcomed visitors last Monday at the Palais Brongniart for \"Paris,
capital of free software\". This meeting attempted for the first time to
unite the major players in free software. Unlike classic commercial
software (known as \"proprietary\"), the latter are not only free, but
also usable and modifiable at will. And a happy consequence: these
software programs have even created several hundred jobs. Despite their
non-commercial aspect, these software programs have been developing for
about ten years. What was originally just a hobby for passionate
computer scientists has become a fully-fledged economic sector and now
represents nearly 2% of the software and services market in France. \"We
are finally beginning to understand that our only chance of establishing
our leadership position in the information technology sector is through
the development of a strong free software industry in France and
Europe,\" emphasizes Alexandre Zapolsky. The president of the
Association of Free Software Service Companies is campaigning to make
the Ile-de-France region the scientific, academic and economic hub of
this sector. In order to remind people that the sector is dynamic, the
big names in IT (Steria, Thales, HP, etc.) presented their offers in
terms of free software. A job space managed by the Parisian ICT
professionals association, Silicon Sentier, and by the ANPE offered 300
job offers. Not bad for a start. Moreover, the ANPE, which has just set
up an agency specializing in IT (85, avenue Philippe-Auguste, Paris XIe)
intends to take a closer look at free software. But these products are
not reserved for scientists and those with a 12-year degree. A cyberbus
installed by the RATP in front of the Palais de la Bourse allowed the
general public to discover the most common applications. This was an
opportunity for some visitors to test their skills and attract the
attention of future recruiters to the rapidly developing niche of IT
assistance.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1502

STRASBOURG CORRESPONDENT - Microsoft, the software giant, will offer its
Office 2007 office suite in around a hundred languages around the world
next year. But one of the versions marketed will be completely new: it
will be bilingual, in French and Alsatian. An agreement was signed on
Thursday, June 29, in Strasbourg between Microsoft France and the Alsace
regional council to develop this pilot project. It will be a \"world
first,\" explains Eric Boustouller, president of Microsoft France. This
is the first time that his company has translated software into a
minority or regional language. Alsatian was chosen because of the high
number of speakers: 60% of Alsatians declare themselves to be dialect
speakers and 35% of them regularly speak Alsatian, according to figures
from the Office for the Language and Culture of Alsace (OLCA), a
regional tool and partner in the operation. To adapt Word, Excel,
Outlook, etc., into Alsatian, a Benedictine task would have to involve
linguists and computer scientists. The Institute of Dialectology of the
Marc-Bloch University (Strasbourg-2) was asked to translate the 50,000
or so words or short sentences in the Office suite. Its former director,
Raymond Matzen, has already prepared the ground: he has drawn up a basic
lexicon of 2,500 words, not hesitating to invent neologisms when
necessary. Thus the browser will be the Webschnüffler (\"Web sniffer\"),
while the keyboard could be called Täschtbrett (\"touch pad\"). For the
Alsace Regional Council, it is first and foremost a question of image:
Alsatian, an Alemannic and Franconian dialect inherited from history, a
language of the heart, of the land, of the family, can also be
associated with modernity. It will thus be \"a support language for new
communication technologies\", notes Adrien Zeller, president (UMP) of
the region. The older ones, sometimes more comfortable in Alsatian than
in French (and especially in English), will thus be able to try their
hand at computers; the younger ones could discover that Alsatian is not
so old-fashioned since even their computer speaks it. Alsatian, used in
conversations in rural areas, is also present on private or public radio
stations (France Bleu Alsace broadcasts dialect programs on its medium
wave network), on television, and in columns in the daily press. It is
used in the \"regional language and culture\" options of national
education. It also allows, explain the linguists, a better acquisition
of German, for which there is a whole network of joint bilingual classes
in Alsace, starting in nursery school. The decline of Alsatian is likely
to accelerate, however: surveys show that its transmission from one
generation to the next is increasingly weak. Only 15.5% of
dialect-speaking couples speak Alsatian to their children. The OLCA has
tried to raise awareness among young couples about the importance of not
depriving their child of Alsatian through a campaign of small bilingual
books and \"Bébé à bord/Kind an Bord\" stickers for their car. Microsoft
Office in Alsatian should be available in the second half of 2007. It
will be available to download in addition to a version of the year in
another language or to be found on CD-ROMs that the OLCA will
distribute. Other versions in regional languages are under
consideration, Mr. Boustouller said, for example for Catalan. The
reactions in Alsace are rather positive. Singer Roger Siffer, a pillar
of Alsatian song and cabaret, applauds, noting that linguistic kinship
should also interest the Swiss and the Baden, with their very similar
dialects. But on Internet forums, discussions are heated: is the
Microsoft \"steamroller\" the best ally of regional and minority
languages? Jean-François Wollbrett, president of the Junge fers
Elsassische association, which organizes Alsatian courses and Stammtisch
(\"regulars\' table\") in dialect, adds that beyond this initiative \"we
should also think about translating free software.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1503

Seen through the prism of Hollywood or the media, the hacker is this
gifted programmer who, in less than thirty seconds, can break into the
best-protected computer system, or who, from his laptop, remotely
infiltrates enemy systems. In turn, hero or cybercriminal. A reductive
vision that has little to do with \"hacker culture\". The Multimedia
Institute of Zagreb explores it in depth and takes a sharp look at its
roots, its fields of action, its specificity, its subversive force, with
the exhibition \"System.hack()\", which was held in a hotel room in the
Croatian capital in mid-June. The project continues in a book and online
with a selection of hacks put into perspective in fascinating essays.
Internet users are invited to complete the database with their favorite
hack. \"A moment of excellence in programming is called a hack. A
perfect hack is surprising, mediagenic, innovative in the use of
technology, funny, and non-violent. \"System.hack()\" is any hack that
opens a closed system or energizes an open system,\" the curators write.
The hacker figure became popular with the development of computers and
the Internet, but this culture has older roots. The curators chose to
open their selection with the edifying radio hoax of October 30, 1938.
On the eve of Halloween (and World War II), Orson Welles threw CBS into
disarray with his adaptation of H.G. Wells\' novel The War of the Worlds
(1). He reported live on the invasion of Earth by Martians, using fake
news bulletins and reports, triggering a wave of panic among listeners.
This larger-than-life simulation shook blind trust in broadcasting and
insinuated a doubt about the credibility of the media that persists more
than ever. At the time of the telephone, they were not yet called
hackers but phreakers, from phone-freaks, these people who studied,
experimented with or even exploited the flaws in the systems used by
telephone companies, like Captain Crunch, alias John Draper. In the 60s,
he had found a way to crack complex telephone relay systems using a
plastic whistle, a toy distributed in Captain Crunch cereal boxes. The
modified whistle made it possible to reproduce the 2,600 hertz tone
necessary to authorize a call and make free phone calls. This earned him
a short stay in prison, where he quickly divulged his technique to other
prisoners, training hundreds of phreakers. \"Throwing me in prison was
their biggest mistake. I did more harm to the telephone companies by
being behind bars than if they had not incarcerated me,\" he joked in an
interview (2). Contrary to the Hollywood cliché, hacker culture is not
that of a lone hero. It is much closer to a \"harmonious ecosystem\",
according to the expression of the programmer Marcell Mars, where each
new organism brings its stone, collaborates and shares the results of
its research. Like the movement for free software, launched twenty-five
years ago by the guru Richard Stallman, today president of the
FreeSoftwareFoundation (see Ecrans of June 24), and which campaigns for
programs that can be copied without limit, whose source code is
accessible and modifiable, unlike proprietary software, such as
Microsoft. The more the restrictions imposed by the giants of IT, music
or cinema increase, the more hackers make a point of honor to circumvent
them. To support his project, Richard Stallman invented a legal tool,
the general public license, which precisely defines that one can freely
copy and modify a program at will. The issue of the free circulation of
information goes far beyond the circle of IT. Transposed into the field
of life and biotechnologies, the hacker\'s response to the uncontrolled
development of GMOs is called \"biological civil disobedience\" or
\"cultural terrorism\". The activist artist Heath Bunting has imagined
the SuperWeed Kit 1.0, a kit distributed on the Internet to produce a
genetically modified weed, resistant to pesticides. He invites guerrilla
gardeners to spread this mutant weed in order to counter the GMO seeds
of the giants of the sector, even if it means destroying all other
species, including organic ones, in the process. A weapon of mass
deterrence, symbolic above all, to force Monsanto and its ilk to take
into account a public opinion hostile to this proliferation. (1)
www.archive.org/details/WAROFTHEWORLDS2 (2) www.barbalet.net/crunch

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1504

A huge mess with an aborted start to the legalization of downloading, a
majority in turmoil, turmoil all the way to the United States where the
American manufacturer Apple is brandishing the threat of abandoning the
French online music market\... More than six months after the start of
its examination, the highly controversial bill on copyright, or DADVSI
(Copyright and related rights in the information society), was
definitively adopted yesterday by Parliament. A late transposition of a
European Union directive, the DADVSI creates a new system of fines for
Internet users who illegally download files and legalizes the embedding
of MTP (technical protection measures) on digital files that organize
and limit copying. Unsurprisingly, only the UMP voted for the text and
still not unanimously since some of its members, supporters of the
global license like Alain Suguenot or Christine Boutin or of greater
protection of free software, voted against. The UDF also voted against,
as did the PS, the PCF and the Greens. The president of the UDF,
François Bayrou, denounced a text that \"seriously\" lacked the
principles of the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen,
while the socialist Patrick Bloche castigated a \"shaky, anachronistic,
unintelligible text, unsuited to technological developments\". An
assessment that is the polar opposite of that of the Minister of
Culture, Donnedieu de Vabres, according to whom the text \"guarantees
respect for copyright, interoperability and the right to private
copying\". If the principle of interoperability (the right to play
downloaded music on the portable player of one\'s choice) is set in
stone in the law, it is framed by an independent administrative
authority that can only be seized by professionals and not by users. A
step backwards to be put down to the Senate since the project adopted by
the National Assembly required the implementation of interoperability
under judicial supervision. In other words, as with the private copying
puzzle, the parliamentary majority is referring to yet another
authority, the 35th of its kind in France, to force Apple to open its
format to all consumers and not just those equipped with their iPod. The
text will still have to be validated by the Constitutional Council
following its referral announced by the opposition. And specified by
decrees whose content will determine the more or less repressive nature
of the sanctions. The more or less systematic and massive application of
fines (from 38,000 to 300,000 euros) will reflect, according to music
professionals who support the law, the will or not of the public
authorities to opt for a \"truly dissuasive\" policy.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1505

For twenty-three years, Richard Stallman has been on a mission for free
software, programs that can be copied and whose source code is
accessible and modifiable, unlike proprietary software such as
Microsoft\'s. The president of the FreeSoftwareFoundation (1), 53, was
in Paris to demonstrate against DRM (usage control device) and the draft
law on copyright (DADVSI). DRM (2) are digital locks grafted onto works
sold online or onto certain CDs and DVDs in order to limit their copying
and use. He went to Matignon on June 9 with the list of 165,000
signatories of the Eucd.info petition (3) demanding the withdrawal of
DADVSI, in order to alert the Prime Minister of the danger it poses to
users of free software. In vain. The FreeSoftwareFoundation launched its
anti-DRM campaign, \"DefectiveByDesign.org\" (4) in Seattle in mid-May.
Why are you hostile to these technologies? They challenge public control
over technology. Major film, music, and computer companies like Sony,
Disney, and Microsoft want to put restrictions on machines. They plan to
build computers that are no longer universal machines, so that certain
tasks can no longer be performed by any program, including a so-called
free program. I call this \"treacherous computing.\" For example, making
a website work only with a specific browser. If you use another one, the
site could refuse to communicate with your machine. Another system,
proposed by Microsoft under the name Palladium, is a program that allows
you to \"seal\" a file so that the content cannot be read by any other
alternative program. There will be no more competition because there
will be no more \"interoperability\". Hollywood and the music factories
plan to use treacherous computing for DRM, so that downloaded videos and
music can only be played on a given computer, making file sharing
impossible. This is not a technological advance but a technical step
backward that they want to impose, a world where every piece of
information will be completely under their control, where permission
will have to be asked each time. But programmers have always known how
to get around these restrictions? Before, there were no laws that
prohibited it, P2P programs are not illegal. You could bypass the
protections of a DVD. But Blue Ray and its rival HD DVD, two new
generation formats to replace the DVD, will be completely locked down.
Why do you think we should mobilize for free software? All freedoms
depend on computer freedom, it is not more important than other
fundamental freedoms but, as the practices of life shift to the
computer, we will need it to maintain other freedoms. Taking advantage
of the weakness of contemporary democracy, large companies are taking
control of the State, they are the ones who control the laws, not the
citizens. It started with the Digital Millennium Copyright Act in the
United States, then they imposed European directives in their interest.
Do you think that, like software, art should be free? Free software is
defined by four essential freedoms: to use the program, to study the
code and change it, to redistribute copies, to improve the program and
to publish its improvements. All works for a practical purpose must be
free. However, in computing, a proprietary word processing program can
be replaced by a free program, this is not the case for art, which is
not interchangeable. But the essential freedom of non-commercial sharing
of exact copies via the Net extends to all published works, including
artistic ones. P2P must be legal, the vast majority of artists earn
nothing from the copyright system, only an elite fill their pockets. And
they are the ones that the music factories hold up as examples. These
factories pay 4% of their income to musicians: few artists earn much and
all the rest earn very little, it is a completely unfair system. I
propose a global license that I have detailed on
www.gnu.org/philosophy.html. The idea is to establish a tax on blank
CDs, and equivalents. All the money would go to the artists and
composers, redistributed according to the popularity of the artists
measured by survey. It is the public who decides. (1) http://fsf.org (2)
http://stopdrm.info (3) http://eucd.info (4) www.defectivebydesign.org

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1506

6: Flash news from all screens The explosive Diet Coke-Mentos duo, the
JFK archives soon on the Web, the 118 218 operators who are taking up
the \"tou tou you tou\"\... 8: The look of\... charlie white The
American photographer slips a strange mutant into everyday scenes.
Reality or fiction? 10: TV moments Recipes for a successful summer saga
The scenario of the soap operas of summer 2006? Hidden loves, family
revenge, supernatural forces\... Be careful, 2007 may be even more
intense. 12: At the controls Rainbow rap The portrait of D\' de Kabal,
the author of the first gay hip-hop clip on the Net. And also Mohamed
Hamidi, the editor-in-chief of the Bondy Blog. 14: Uses and users These
\"little games\" that the industry covets Let\'s start by relaxing. Then
we spend hours on a computer or on our mobile. Tetris or Minesweeper are
\"casual games\" par excellence, a market that should explode. 16: the
JT Screen File: the formatting factory In France as in the United
States, the new news presenters no longer look like their elders. Young,
smooth and sanitized, they are the first victims of political
correctness and the reign of the image. 22: the Netoscope day after day
The latest news of the week\'s online releases and the sites to visit.
25: the Current TV Guide, the TV for viewers And also the video game
that stimulates the neurons, Italian thrillers from the 70s, a report on
the filming of a \"Concert sauvage\" by France 4, artists who hijack
Google Earth\... 42 Practical How to equip yourself with a Wi-Fi network
at home Tips and tricks for watching a film on your computer or sending
emails from your sofa without getting tangled up in wires. And also the
plasma TV test bench. 46: Tribune richardstallman The president of the
FreeSoftwareFoundation explains why he fights for free software and
against any control by the industrialists of new technologies.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1507

SOME TEXTS of law are painfully introduced. The one relating to
copyright and related rights in the information society (DAVDSI), which
transposes a European directive from 2001 into French law, is a good
example. The joint committee (CMP), which brought together, on Thursday
morning, June 22, seven senators and seven deputies from the majority
and the opposition, reached a compromise in a highly charged atmosphere.
Highly controversial, this bill, voted on under emergency procedure
(i.e. with only one reading, instead of the usual two, in the National
Assembly and then in the Senate) had been considerably modified by both
chambers. Since Christmas 2005, heated debates have divided all the
parties and put professionals from the music, cinema and Internet
sectors in a frenzy. Renaud Donnedieu de Vabres, Minister of Culture and
Communication, had publicly committed to proceeding with a second
reading if the provisions adopted by the deputies and senators were very
different. The PS parliamentarians of the CMP, Patrick Bloche, Christian
Paul and David Assouline, reminded him of this unfulfilled promise. They
again asked the government to lift the emergency on this text, and were
joined by Jean Dionis du Séjour (UDF). In a very exceptional event, the
opposition parliamentarians and their substitutes in the CMP considered
that \"the rights of Parliament were being flouted\" and slammed the
door of the meeting held at the Palais-Bourbon, \"to protest against
this sleight of hand and not to endorse a text adopted without debate,
on the orders of the government\". The two rapporteurs, Senator Michel
Thiollière and MP Christian Vanneste, who had met the day before for a
conciliation meeting, therefore continued the CMP in the morning. No
fewer than fifty-five proposals for new wording of the articles were
adopted. THORNY INTEROPERABILITY One of the most thorny points, the
question of interoperability - the possibility of reading a work on the
medium of one\'s choice - has been reworked once again. According to
Jacques Valade, president of the Senate\'s culture committee, \"this
text guarantees the presence of small, free software players. Without
going as far as some in the National Assembly wanted\". It is thus
clearly stated that \"technical measures \[intended to protect works\]
must not have the effect of preventing the effective implementation of
interoperability\". The idea of a group of mediators to resolve private
copying conflicts has been abandoned in favor of a technical measures
regulatory authority, desired by the Senate. This will ultimately
include six members and will have the status of an independent
administrative authority, with judicial and technical powers. Its scope
of intervention is extended to interoperability. The CMP also reinstated
an article from the National Assembly on the liability of software
publishers, excluding from the penalization illegal downloads of
\"software intended for collaborative work \[sic\], research or the
exchange of files or objects not subject to copyright remuneration\".
The architecture of the sanctions provided for in the event of illegal
downloads was not, however, modified. This compromise text was only
voted on by the UMP. The UDF abstained, even though some of its
proposals were ratified. Refusing to sit in solidarity with the PS, the
PCF and Green representatives did not participate in the vote. This text
must still be the subject of final adoption on June 30 by Parliament.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1508

The text on \"Copyright and related rights in the information society\"
(DADVSI), which is being considered by the joint committee this week,
contains economic and strategic issues that go far beyond the simple
remuneration of authors and performers in the segment of digitized
works. Indeed, digitization, by dissociating the work from its physical
medium, introduces a new intermediary into the relationship between
artists and the public, the creator of digital encoding formats and
software capable of producing and reading these formats, who thus finds
himself in a position to control the flow of information. In collusion
with the dominant publishers, and contrary to the interests of both
artists and the public, this silently monopolistic position of technical
control is already producing a number of perverse effects. This is the
case with the \"zoning\" of DVDs: presented as a means of \"fighting
piracy\", this mechanism makes it possible, in contravention of
international trade laws, to prohibit, for example, the reading in
Europe of a DVD purchased in the United States. This of course does not
prevent piracy - re-burning a DVD is child\'s play - but it serves to
artificially segment distinct markets in order to control prices. This
is how Warner currently sells its DVDs in China for \$1.50. Is this
selling at a loss, or is it the price that could be paid everywhere else
for works that have already been largely written off? Why is it also not
possible to skip the advertising that appears at the beginning of each
DVD? A trifle, or an insidious monopolization of available brain time?
The irruption, not uncontrolled but rather too well controlled, of
digital technology into our lives, can be very damaging, because for the
first time, control of usage can be done even in the private sphere of
individuals. This space of freedom, previously inviolable, is currently
threatened, through individuals\' Internet connections. Let\'s
re-establish the truth: the purpose of the EUCD directive from which
DADVSI comes is not the protection of artists, nor even the fight
against illegal copies. The main provision of this text is to protect
\"technical protection measures\" (TPM), software methods for encoding
works, thereby creating a right over the means of transmitting
information. This new form of industrial property has surprising
characteristics: it does not require any innovation but just use in a
system (the CSS algorithm for pseudo-protection of DVDs is a simple
coding by exchange of symbols, as Julius Caesar did two thousand years
ago), does not require any filing with an evaluation body such as a
patent office, costs nothing and its duration is unlimited. In addition,
it applies to algorithmic methods, while the European Parliament has
rejected the patentability of software. The purpose of this right is to
prevent anyone from creating software to decode a digital stream
containing a work (which therefore even concerns word processing files)
without the permission of the creator of the encoding algorithm.
Subordinating the creators of reading software to the publishers and
creators of the encoding format makes it possible to control the use
that individuals will make of their digital equipment, as has already
been done by Sony-BMG with its XCP system, which installed on the
user\'s computer, without their knowledge and irreversibly, modified
versions of the system components aimed at preventing certain behaviors
deemed contrary to the rights of exploitation of the works. Even more
serious, Sony\'s device regularly connected via the Internet to the
publisher\'s site, which constitutes a very serious threat to the
privacy and confidentiality of information systems due to the risk of
malicious use of this connection. The current version of the DADVSI
text, which subordinates the right to interoperability to the decisions
of an independent administrative authority, does not provide protection
against this. But above all, MTPs in the Internet era allow the rental
of works: no one will have usable copies of their files, which will be
stored in an encrypted \"digital safe\", an enclave of the publisher
within individuals\' computers, the publisher being able to revoke the
licenses to use the files at any time via the Internet. While digital
technology allows for the multiplication of access to culture, such
systems would weaken it, putting works under the sword of Damocles of a
hard drive failure, the disappearance of the publisher, or instantaneous
digital auto-da-fés if the censorship of a particular work were decided.
Is this really what artists want? And what would be the cost of access
to works under such a monopoly of control? First of all, is it
reasonable to charge 1 euro per title, when most of the distribution
costs are covered by Internet users themselves, and artists only receive
a few cents? While the text voted by the National Assembly preserved the
independence of free software, the version heavily amended by the Senate
allows, under the pretext of protecting artists, to prohibit the
redistribution of source code, the keystone of the distributed creation
of added value in the world of software, and to close the doors of
administrations and companies to free software. What the current battles
around the appropriation of intellectual and algorithmic methods,
software patents and MTPs combined, illustrate is the emergence of
interoperability as a fundamental principle of law in the digital age,
as freedom of speech and association were in the past for the creation
of a modern society, free from feudalism. The National Assembly had
understood this, and this decision had been welcomed well beyond our
borders. While the European Commission must re-examine the EUCD
directive in October, let us not hastily sacrifice our cultural and
technological independence. The price for artists, the Nation as a whole
and culture would be very heavy to pay. \* Respectively MP (UMP) for
Tarn and former Prime Minister.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1509

At first glance, the \"pitch\" of this newcomer with the perfectly
incongruous name is most bizarre: Lulu.com intends to allow everyone to
use the Internet to self-publish, as simply as creating a blog, and to
give its letters of nobility to a genre that is at the very least mocked
and decried, the self-published work. Two years after its launch across
the Atlantic, the portal is arriving in France and the rest of Europe.
Its Canadian founder, Bob Young, has the ambition to make it an \"eBay
of intellectual property\", nothing less. In other words, a marketplace
rich in several million references. And on which creators-sellers will
be able to find an audience of readers-buyers interested in their
thoughts on the dissection of ants in a desert environment or their
\"me, my life, my work\". Ambitions. \"France loves books and
revolutions,\" says the boss of Lulu, a high-tech giant for having
co-founded Red Hat, the number 1 in free software in the world,
ironically, and our universal service allows publishing to be opened up
to those who have not had access to it until now.\" Lulu.com does not
intend to limit itself to books and already offers Internet users the
possibility of publishing music, photos and videos and, tomorrow,
software. On the site, everything is à la carte: the license, classic
copyright or \"copyleft\" allowing copying under certain conditions, the
format, electronic and/or paper, the price and the jacket, etc. \"The
author controls his publication terms from start to finish,\" explains
Bob Young, \"and our role is limited to providing him, for a fee of two
cents per page, the tools to make himself known online, print and
distribute.\" Lulu, which uses the latest Xerox printing technology,
only prints each copy once the book has been ordered and paid for, zero
inventory, and only charges an additional 20% commission on top of the
low cost price, with the remaining 80% going to the author. In the end,
the putative writer can get away with a handful of euros per copy.
Picasso. The flexible and economical model (see below) allows Lulu to
nurture legitimate ambitions in a market that Bob Young describes as
\"new and totally disconnected from traditional publishing.\" The site
currently publishes 1,300 new books per week, twice as many as the top
10 American publishing groups, and has already released more than 55,000
books. Enough to predict a turnover of 15 to 20 million dollars in 2006
(5 million in 2005) and to affirm that the balance is already there. Far
from dreaming of one day \"self-publishing\" the future JK Rowling, Bob
Young is betting that his \"service-tool\" is destined to become an
essential online commercial platform, where millions of increasingly
dematerialized works will be able to find their micromarket, even if it
is limited to a handful of units. \"Sotheby\'s occasionally sells
Picassos for a few tens of millions of dollars each and eBay sells tens
of thousands of items every day that bring in tens of billions of
dollars in revenue,\" explains the enthusiastic entrepreneur, \"we want
to make Lulu the place for exchanging intellectual property on a par
with what eBay did for tangible goods.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1510

New York - Ray Ozzie, who only joined Microsoft in 2005, will replace
Bill Gates as the world\'s leading innovation officer at the software
giant, as its dominance of the computing world adapts to the Internet.
Microsoft announced Thursday that founder Bill Gates will gradually step
down from his operational leadership role by July 2008, while remaining
chairman of the board. His title of chief software architect, the
company\'s house name for the head of product development, will
immediately go to Ozzie, who took over as CTO in spring 2005 when
Microsoft acquired Groove Networks. Ozzie, 50, founded the company in
1997, which specialized in real-time remote work software. Yesterday,
analysts said they were not very worried about this change of
leadership, insisting on a succession plan that they considered well
prepared by Bill Gates (who had already given up his CEO position in
2000 to Steve Ballmer) and on the very good reputation of Ray Ozzie.
Before his young company Groove Networks, Ozzie had created in the 1980s
the Lotus Notes professional messaging software (later developed by
IBM), and he is considered one of the very best professional
applications programmers in the world. \"Ray Ozzie\'s promotion is a
natural evolution and could have a positive impact on the long term,\"
says Jason Maynard, of the bank Credit Suisse. \"Bill Gates has been
preparing this since Ray Ozzie was hired and we are only moderately
concerned about the impact of the announcement,\" underlines Brent
Thill, of Citigroup. But investors seem to be struggling to regain
confidence after the setbacks linked in recent months to the sluggish
launch of the Xbox 360 video game console and, above all, the delayed
release of Windows Vista, Microsoft\'s new operating system. The
group\'s shares have lost more than 20% of their value since the end of
January. \"Given the recent product delays and the decline in the stock,
losing such a visionary \[Bill Gates\] could affect morale in the short
term,\" adds Brent Thill, also noting that this change of leader is
\"emblematic of a transition in terms of business model.\" For Jason
Maynard, the new chief software architect will have \"the impressive
task of evolving \[Microsoft\] from a model centered around the PC to a
model focused on services\" and software available online. In short, it
is Ray Ozzie who will have to understand to what extent the behavior of
the PC user has changed recently. The latter, pushed by Google\'s free
offerings or the whole \"open source\" movement, is increasingly
inclined to turn to the Internet for its computer applications. With
regard to professional customers, adds the Credit Suisse analyst,
Microsoft will also have to be more flexible and more responsive while
competition is increasing from groups like Oracle, Salesforce.com and
Red Hat, a major distributor of the free software Linux. \"Even if we
think that Microsoft has understood \[this challenge of online
services\], the reality is that it is difficult to manage an
organization of this magnitude rooted in many old practices,\" concludes
Jason Maynard.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1511

On one side, laundry drying on a line. On the other, three young men in
jeans and sneakers, absorbed in their screens. This small apartment in
the 12th arrondissement of Paris could well be that of a gamer brought
up on World of Warcraft or Counter-Strike. It is in fact the heart of
one of the most innovative and promising companies on the Net:
Podemus.com. As indicated by an audio presentation on their site, it is
the \"first French-speaking podcasting and videoblogging portal\".
Visited by more than 200,000 people per month, Podemus has become one of
the French references. By the thousands, geeks, nerds or simple people
have made it their main source of information, delighted to be able to
choose à la carte and for free from these hundreds of audio or video
programs. Podemus lists pretty much everything that is done in podcast,
from the most serious (France Inter) to the most offbeat (for example,
the hilarious Editions du Mutisme, the blog of a fan of Bollywood trash)
(1). The apartment is that of Olivier Vignot. With Mayel de Borniol,
they have been managing the site for nine months under the supervision
of their manager, Bertrand Lenotre. Olivier is 22, Mayel, 21. The first
is a project manager, the second takes care of programming and
development. A duo whose origins go back to a shared passion, in
adolescence, for the new territories of the Net, libertarian version.
After graduating from the same school, ABC Formation, the two friends
quickly understood the fabulous potential of open source and free
software and set up their first company, Ablaze Productions (2). The
idea for Podemus came from the duo\'s meeting with Bertrand Lenotre, the
first Frenchman to start podcasting (3). \"Thanks to the success of his
podcast, Bertrand had some hosting problems,\" explains Olivier. \"As we
liked his show, we provided him with free disk space and bandwidth. He
then had the idea of creating a site to list podcasts, to help people
discover this new medium, and he offered to make it happen.\" Olivier
had barely finished his explanation when Mayel interrupted him:
\"That\'s it, DSK has confirmed his interest.\" The former minister
asked Podemus to help him create his podcast. He will join other Podemus
clients, such as Karl Zéro, Omar and Fred, and the host Max (4)\...
Among their major partners, Mayel and Olivier cite LCI, Europe 1 and
Radio France. However, to maintain their independence, they have refused
investment offers from other major media outlets. And, rather than
talking about business plans, they prefer to present their current
podcast: Radiovni 83, a site for crazy ufologists (5). Soon, the
apartment will resume its usual functions, and the company will move
into real offices. The team has also hired a third person, Julien
Millanvoye, former editor-in-chief of Blast magazine, also a geek in the
SF, Star Wars and alter-globalization version. Finally, Podemus put
online, on May 31, a new version of the site in Web 2.0. A small
revolution that allows Internet users to create their own page in a few
clicks. Supported by major investors, critically acclaimed on the
Internet, this very polished version makes Podemus the \"very first
French-speaking agency for independent podcasters\". Olivier likes this
new role as a catalyst for free electrons. \"This will allow talented
amateurs to transform their passion for podcasts into a profession.\"
Dare you? (1) pneuma.podemus.com (2) web.ablaze.fr (3)
podcasteur.podemus.com (4) karlzero.podemus.com, omaretfred.podemus.com,
maxpod.podemus.com (5) ovni83.podemus.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1512

THE ROAD is mapped out. Steve Ballmer, CEO of Microsoft since 2000,
already has the keys to the group. With Bill Gates, he will continue to
share power after June 2008: his friend Bill will keep his position as
chairman of the board of directors. In terms of software design, the
richest man on the planet will smoothly hand over his prerogatives to
two technical directors. These successors should smoothly continue the
work of the \"visionary\". He has already strongly influenced the future
of the group. After conquering the PC universe with Windows and its
Office software (Word, Excel), Microsoft is trying to expand its
spectrum. The idea is to distribute its programs and services on the
Internet, television, music, video games and mobile phones. On the
Internet, Microsoft is racing behind Yahoo! and Google. Its two rivals
are expanding the use of their search engines. They offer free e-mail
services, paid video, voice communications and online newspapers. Google
is going even further. Since the summer, the search engine has been
selling its first software online, a version of Google Earth to walk
around a virtual earth. And to make life easier for PC users, since
January, the Californian company has been offering a \"Google pack\"
consisting of around ten software programs to download for free, to view
photos, texts and protect personal computers from viruses. Larry Page,
co-founder of Google with Sergueï Brin, explained in January to Le
Figaro that he did not want to confront Microsoft head-on. But just like
Bill Gates, he admitted wanting to \"change the world\". Its power lies
in Windows This young competitor is emerging where Microsoft does not
expect it: it is testing free wireless Internet connections (Wifi) with
the San Francisco city hall. These attacks are slightly tilting the
strategy driven by Bill Gates. But the power and future of Microsoft
lies in its Windows program, the operating system used by 95% of PCs in
the world. The company will continue to enrich its flagship program to
maintain its price. New Internet search functions and security programs
will be added to Vista, the next version, whose launch was delayed until
early 2007. According to its detractors, Microsoft innovates little, but
appropriates the promising solutions of its adversaries. However,
Windows\' competing programs, based on the free software Linux, are not
managing to undermine Microsoft\'s supremacy in PCs. Bill Gates\'
\"withdrawal\" will not change anything. Marc Cherki

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1513

Today, 100% of CAC 40 companies are equipped with them, as are half of
the 350 to 400 French companies with more than 2,000 employees,
estimates Emmanuelle Olivié-Paul, associate director of the research
firm Markess International. What are they? ERPs, \"Enterprise Resources
Planning\" (integrated management software packages) which allow all
management and production actions to be recorded in a standard format to
feed a company\'s information system and thus allow its managers to
monitor activity in real time and make better-informed and faster
decisions. In principle\... Because after ten to fifteen years which
have seen these systems gradually deployed, opinions are divided: have
ERPs become the vector of performance, or the manager\'s nightmare? For
Henri Savall, director of the Institute of Socio-Economics of Businesses
and Organizations (Iseor-Lyon-II), the case is heard, as shown, among
other things, by the examination of 20 cases of ERP installation by Guy
Saint-Léger, author of a thesis defended at Iseor. \"ERPs pursue an old
chimera, which corresponds to a real need: to know what is really
happening in the company, to obtain reliable data on what the different
actors are doing, to finally manage to control all the procedures. The
paradox of ERPs is that they require, in order to be fed with reliable
data, the collaboration of the actors, even though this tool deprives
them of part of their power, their autonomy and especially their
know-how, by imposing standardized procedures on them.\" In the absence
of real negotiation with the actors, most often \"sacrificed\" due to
lack of means, they then tend to provide false information to the
system. \"The data is centralized, but it is falsified, which gives the
manager a feeling of false security, which is very dangerous for the
organization,\" continues Mr. Savall. For such a system to work, all the
stakeholders must be involved, and the process then takes ten years, not
three! The other form of user resistance is the almost systematic demand
for \"adjustments\" to the ERP, by adding applications that respect the
specificity of the different professions. This gradually leads the
organization to recreate the \"balkanization\"\... that the ERP was
supposed to eliminate. Philippe Le Mesnil, consultant at Cegos,
certainly recognizes \"the resistance to change\" that the
implementation of ERPs generates, but indicates that this resistance can
be overcome because, \"in the long run, the stakeholders end up
perceiving the advantage of knowing what is happening in the next
department.\" On the other hand, he admits that the productivity gains
supposed to be generated by ERPs are not obvious. For example, the
departments responsible for orders and invoicing, accustomed to handling
\"related activities\" locally (anomaly management, customer reminders,
invoice corrections), had to recreate departments centralizing these
activities since the system did not take them into account in
standardized procedures. \"The real contribution of ERPs is the richness
and quality of reporting, which is a significant plus for the manager.
But this comes at the cost of a constraint for users, who are forced to
comply with rigid and often off-putting procedures, even if the
interfaces have been greatly improved.\" The lawsuit brought against
ERPs is no longer relevant, says Danielle Tuarze, senior partner at CSC
Peat Marwick. Today, ERPs are only a \"backbone\" that allows
applications specific to each business to be grafted, \"where the real
added value of the company is at stake,\" she says. Major publishers are
also developing partnerships to design these \"business building
blocks\" and are developing their own systems to open them up to
newcomers. But Richard Collin, president of the consulting firm ICCE
(Collective Intelligence, Cooperation and Efficiency), doubts that ERP
publishers, \"the latest avatar of the industrial era\", are capable of
handling the immaterial processes at the origin of real value-creating
innovations. \"The engineering culture that prevails in French companies
continues to seek productivity gains in processes, while we are already
at the peak. At the risk of missing out on what the second generation
Internet or free software can bring to the creativity of
organizations.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1514

MICROSOFT The European Commission often plays a useful role in the
proper functioning of markets in Europe, for example when it encourages
States to deregulate. But it can also be the source of obstacles:
although this may seem paradoxical, this is particularly the case when
it implements what is called \"competition policy\", simply because its
action is based on erroneous or vague conceptions of competition. We saw
this when the Commission banned, for questionable reasons, merger
projects, for example Schneider-Legrand or General Electric-Honeywell.
History is now repeating itself with Microsoft, which is accused not, of
course, of any merger project, but of the existence of an \"abuse of
dominant position\". This case is a very fascinating textbook case.
Indeed, Microsoft had to face attacks from the American justice system
between 1999 and 2002. Its competitors accused it of abusing its
dominant position because it had an advantage in developing software
compatible with its Windows operating system and they wanted it, for
example, to remove the Internet Explorer browser from the latter.
Finally, the proceedings ended, in particular because Microsoft agreed
to sell certain protocols under license. But the American trial had
barely ended when the European Commission began to attack Microsoft. In
March 2004, it fined it 497 million euros for \"abuse of a dominant
position\". And it forced Microsoft to provide PC manufacturers with
versions of Windows that had removed its software for accessing Media
Player audio and video files. Yet it is not clear how having additional
software could harm Microsoft customers (in fact, for a year now, there
has been no demand for the version of Windows without Media Player!).
But the Commission\'s fear is that Windows\' dominant market share will
create \"barriers to entry\" for its competitors. The Commission heard
Microsoft one last time on 30 and 31 March before the hearings held at
the end of April by the Court of First Instance, which has been appealed
by Microsoft and is due to rule shortly on the Commission\'s 2004
decision. But the Commission has suggested that, if the Court rules in
its favour, it would encourage firms that market free software and use
Microsoft licences to make public the procedures for creating interfaces
between these products, at the risk of making Microsoft\'s original
protocols freely accessible and thus threatening its intellectual
property. Taking the lead, Microsoft recently announced that it would
issue \"reference licenses\" to view and understand the necessary
characteristics of its source code. The firm has therefore gone far
beyond what Brussels was demanding. In fact, the European Commission
criticized Microsoft not only for its \"abuse of a dominant position\"
(which would give it a competitive advantage in producing new software)
but also for risking creating interoperability difficulties due to the
secret nature of its source codes. However, interoperability has never
posed a problem until now. We are therefore legitimately led to think
that there is essentially, on the part of the European authorities, an
obsession with what is called a \"dominant position\". For what reason?
The Microsoft case is edifying because it reveals two very different
visions of competition. The European authorities remain faithful to what
is called in most economics textbooks \"pure and perfect competition\".
This theory is the result of an obsession: to prevent a firm from having
\"excessive market power\". We therefore simply look at the number of
producers on an arbitrarily defined market and consider that there is
monopoly power when this number is so low that competition does not play
a role. From this point of view, it is significant that the attacks by
the European Commission are the result not of complaints from consumers
who feel harmed by Microsoft\'s \"dominant position\", but of the legal
activism of the firm\'s competitors! However, this formal vision of
competition, even if it is widespread, is fundamentally erroneous. It
mixes two totally different situations: on the one hand, that where the
State, using its power of constraint, prohibits any other producer from
entering the market as a result of a legal provision or as a result of
the establishment of patents; on the other hand, that where a producer
is an innovator. Now, an innovator is by definition someone who
initially holds 100% of the market share and it is absurd to say that he
benefits from \"market power\". His position does not result from the
exercise of a power, but on the contrary from the use of a freedom, the
freedom to enter a market, which all potential producers had but which
he was the only one to dare or to know how to use. Therefore the notions
of \"market power\" or \"dominant position\" are meaningless except,
precisely, in the case of monopolies of state origin. A correct vision
of competition is to say that it exists when there is freedom to enter a
market. Thus, when Microsoft launched and then developed its Windows
software, everyone was free to do the same. And its competitors were
then wrong to accuse it of an alleged dominant position. By exercising
its freedom to innovate and produce, Microsoft did not infringe
anyone\'s rights. And now her rights are being infringed by forcing her
to give up to others part of what legitimately belongs to her because
she created it, on the pretext that others do not have an equivalent
position on the market! It is fascinating to see how the existence of
freedom allows the coexistence of \"free software\" and \"appropriate
software\", which makes the notion of \"dominant position\" all the more
incomprehensible. In this creative profusion that calls into question
both technical imagination and entrepreneurial strategies or ideological
visions, the entry on the scene of the administrative and judicial
powers of the European Union seems incongruous. It is time to allow the
unlimited blossoming of innovations and therefore to stop all the
procedures that, in the name of competition, kill competition. \*
Professor at Paris-Dauphine University.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1515

Do you say \"firewall\" or \"firewall\"? \"Phishing\" or \"filoutage\"?
\"Emoticon\" or \"mousette\"? \"Espiogiciel\" or \"spyware\"? That\'s
what the new Observatoire de néologie du Québec at Université Laval
wants to know, after spending six months monitoring trends in the
translation of technological terms in Quebec and France. Julie
Pelletier, a doctoral student who conducted the survey, wanted to
\"reflect on the success or failure factors\" of translations, which
often come from duly mandated organizations such as the Office de la
langue française (OQLF) in Quebec, and the DGLFLF in France (we\'ll
spare you its full name). Since both nations have their own standards
organization, several official translations can coexist. Hence the
interest in evaluating their usage to determine the most popular ones.
Ms. Pelletier analyzed the terms used by journalists in three Quebec
dailies (Le Soleil, Le Devoir and La Presse) and three French dailies
(Le Figaro, Le Monde, Libération). A few findings, in bulk: 74% of
Quebec newspapers talk about \"blogues\" and 68% about \"clavardage\".
For their part, 99% of their French counterparts use \"blogs\" and 100%
\"chat\" (pronounced tchatte). The recent term \"baladodiffusion\",
which has so depressed some technology journalists, the \"baladeurs\",
that dates back more to 1985 than 2005, is used by 74% of Quebec
newspapers while 79% of French people prefer \"podcasting\". It must be
said that over there, words ending in \"ing\" and other French-style
anglicisms largely interfere with the semantic fields of everything
modern, from fast food to computers. Is English cooler in France than
here? \"Americanophilia is a general phenomenon, not just in France.
Except that here, it\'s when we probe the uses of the spoken language
that we find it the most,\" says Ms. Pelletier, who recently presented
this study as part of the 74th ACFAS conference at McGill University.
\"In writing, Quebec journalists clearly don\'t allow themselves to use
English words as much as their French counterparts. Local newspapers are
under more pressure in terms of francization, as official vectors of the
language. Ultimately, there are a lot of things proposed in Quebec that
are well established, while in France, not at all.\" The art of
adaptation is difficult. Sometimes it produces great successes: \"spam\"
for unwanted emails, the \"foire aux questions\" to francize the acronym
FAQ (Frequently Asked Questions). Other terms are ignored because they
are not popularized enough by the media, or because they are too long or
far-fetched. In order to measure the general public\'s enthusiasm for
some of these neologisms, Julie Pelletier conducted a survey of 250
French-speaking Internet users (75% of whom were Quebecers), alongside
her study of newspapers. Among the technological terms that are well
established in everyday use, she cites \"bogue\", \"courriel\", \"lien
hypertexte\", \"lecteur MP3\", \"logiciellibre\", \"baladodiffusion\",
\"blogue\" and \"hameçonnage\". Among those that are struggling, we can
count \"barrière de sécurité\" (firewall), \"binette\" (smiley),
\"clavardage\" (chat), \"espiogiciel\" (spyware) and \"filoutage\"
(phishing). Finally, some English terms persist in their original
language despite official translations, including firewall and smiley.
As a linguist and translator, is Ms. Pelletier satisfied or shocked by
the linguistic usages of her contemporaries? It is impossible to know.
\"We take a descriptive approach,\" she says. \"We don\'t want to give
any opinion, we just want to describe the real usage of terms to see
what is adopted or not.\" It should be noted that among linguists
specializing in neology, there are two schools of thought: on one side,
the \"purists\" like Marie-Éva de Villers and her normative dictionary,
who seek to impose usages by passing judgment on others by writing, for
example, \"to be avoided\" next to certain terms. On the other side,
there are the \"variationists\" of which Ms. Pelletier is a member, who
reserve their judgment. It must be said that it is difficult to fight
against terms widely adopted by people. \"It is the users who take
precedence,\" she says to summarize her approach.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1516

This week, the Web helps me\... \...to make a film camera This site
allows you to \"download your camera\" in the form of a detailed plan
that you must then reproduce in the finest and most opaque material
possible. The goal: to create a \"pinhole\", or lensless camera, which
works according to the principle of the darkroom by exposing a film to
the inverted image coming from a very small hole. A hole that is quite
tricky to drill, in fact, since any error in roundness, depth or width
will cost you the clarity of your image. The camera itself will not cost
you anything. So, it is an easy risk to take. Read the instructions
carefully and follow the animated 3D assembly plan offered on the site.
Quality of explanations: 3/5 Cool factor: 3/5
www.linatree.com/index.html?lang=fr THE BIRTHDAY June 1992 We \"surf\"
the Internet. The expression \"surfing on the Internet\" was first
officially used in June 1992 in the newsletter of the Wilson Library at
the University of Minnesota. \"When you jump from page to page on the
Web, it\'s like jumping from wave to wave while surfing the ocean,\"
explained Jean Armour Polly, a librarian turned publisher with her
NetMom series, which explained technology to mothers. Today, mothers
\"surf\" the Web like everyone else, and when they are French-speaking,
they \"navigate\"; always the theme of the ocean, associated in many
cultures with the idea of total freedom of movement. Ms. Polly later
acknowledged that the term had already been used by hackers on Usenet
since 1991. However, it is her name that gives the correct answer in the
American edition of Quelques arpents de piège. THE QUOTE \"Game consoles
have always been associated with the image of the teenager alone in the
darkness of his bedroom. It\'s time to free ourselves from this
stereotype, otherwise we will never really be part of global culture. I
would like typical gamers to be people of all ages, who move, are active
and have fun.\" SHIGERU MIYAMOTO, Nintendo guru and father of the famous
Mario, in an interview with MTV on May 26. THE TECH WORD TO PLUG
Crowdsourcing This derivative of \"Outsourcing\" describes a new
business model based on the pooling of individual microproductions of a
large number of Internet users. The small contributions of each, once
multiplied, make it possible to create immense banks of images, texts,
encyclopedic articles or specialized resources of all kinds. The
resulting product can be sold individually, in which case the site
serves as a sort of representative agent for each producer, or offered
to Internet users in exchange for advertising exposure, or given away
free of charge, as in open-source collaborative sites such as Wikis.
DIGITAL Software piracy worldwide. According to the Business Software
Alliance, which represents the interests of commercial software
publishers, 35% of the software installed on PCs worldwide is pirated.
Proportion by region of the world North America: 22% Western Europe: 35%
Asia-Pacific: 54% Middle East and Africa: 57% Eastern Europe: 69% Latin
America: 68% Source: study conducted by IDC for the Business Software
Alliance, May 2

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1517

ACCESSIBLE on the Internet, free, scalable, efficient and not very
susceptible to virus attacks, free software has at first glance all the
qualities to attract a large number of companies. To the point that the
European Commission is campaigning for its development. In France, large
administrations and local authorities have started the shift and are
gradually equipping themselves with IT tools from the world of open
source. Their motivations are essentially economic. Then comes a more
ideological stance: no longer depending on the agenda and commercial
conditions of a software publisher and its proprietary solutions. Faced
with this movement, big names in IT such as IBM, Oracle, Sun or Oracle
are investing in open source projects and community software
development. However, moving from a classic, marked-out IT system to
open source is not necessarily within everyone\'s reach. And the
migration can sometimes hold surprises. Free is the founding principle
of open source. Software is designed from the joint work of hundreds of
thousands of developers. These communities or foundations that have been
created in this collaborative mode are developing these products that
anyone can download from the Internet. There is therefore no license to
pay, all workstations can be equipped without marginal cost. Getting
familiar with new benchmarks Thus, the FireFox Internet browser is
accessible from the Mozilla Foundation site as is the OpenOffice office
suite from the site www.openoffice.org. However, \"more and more
consulting companies or publishers are marketing software designed in
open source mode. In this case, we fall back into a more classic
economic model\", specifies Bertrand Diard, CEO and co-founder of the
publisher Talend. If the publisher has the obligation to share the
manufacturing secrets of its software and to make it freely accessible
from the Web, nothing prevents it from marketing a packaged offer,
enriched with functionalities. In other words, freedom is not always
synonymous with free. \"Licenses represent between 5% and 20% of the
cost of IT equipment depending on the number of workstations,\" says
Yves Miezan Ezo, head of training marketing at the service company
Alcove, which offers solutions based on the Linux operating system and
free software. Also, before freeing themselves from a proprietary
system, the business manager must assume a whole series of induced
costs. First of all, they will have to provide training for their staff
who will switch from a familiar world, most often Microsoft Office if it
is only office automation (word processing, spreadsheet, page layout
application, etc.), to OpenOffice or StarOffice. \"Migrating from one
system to another is difficult if there is no support for the change,\"
explains Yves Miezan Ezo. It is not easy to become familiar with new
benchmarks when you are used to working in Word. The best way is still
to recreate the document templates used in Microsoft Office in
OpenOffice or StarOffice. As an indication, training around twenty
employees for a day and a half will cost around 1,000 euros. In
addition, developments will be necessary to create specific
functionalities related to the company\'s activity. Are these programs
reserved for specialists? The need for expertise depends above all on
the company\'s level of equipment. \"Downloading the FireFox or
OpenOffice browser is within everyone\'s reach. On the other hand,
operating a database, managing an infrastructure or developing
applications from the Linux operating system requires more IT
knowledge,\" emphasizes Bertrand Diard. Also, unless you have a
permanent IT manager, using a service provider is necessary to migrate
from a proprietary system to an open environment. First, adaptations and
developments will be essential to find the same environment. Then,
getting involved in the world of free software requires constant
monitoring to follow the developments, corrections and updates made by
the open source community. These are all tasks that a service company
will accomplish\... for a fee.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1518

All corporate computing is now being disrupted by the Internet. Software
publishers are reinventing their business models to move towards
services. \"The debate is no longer between free software and
proprietary systems, but at the level of appropriation of standards,\"
explains Jean-Christophe Gougeon, in charge of software technologies at
Anvar. Publishers have understood that they can integrate free software
components into their offering. Service providers and integrators are
now recovering free licenses and providing additional services. Apache
has established itself on Microsoft servers. Companies are selling
services on Linux. MySQL, the world\'s leading \"free\" database, has
more than four million servers deployed around the world. The languages
of the \"open source\" community are spreading. Free software is
establishing itself. We still have to learn to manage this freedom (read
elsewhere). 2005 was truly the year of the opening to digital
convergence: in terms of the number of lines, the voice over IP market
(telecommunications over the Internet) quadrupled last year to exceed
the 25 million lines mark worldwide, notes Idate (Institute of
Audiovisual and Telecommunications in Europe). The Skype platform served
as a revelation. This technology, which involves the coupling of
telephony and IT, is transforming the telecoms market and forcing
historical operators to react to find relays for their traditional
activity. Flexibility of use, speed and simplicity It is the equipment
manufacturers who, under the combined pressure of deregulation and the
crossing of technological thresholds, have developed voice over IP,
overtaking the operators. And, now increasingly accessible due to the
drop in the price of PBXs, voice over IP for the user generates savings
on both communications and subscriptions. Thus, telecom operators see a
new type of competition emerging among Internet and IT players. To adapt
their strategy, they can develop new services on their own (like Neuf
Telecom, a mobile operator, which created its subsidiary Wengo a year
ago, specializing in IP telephony), but also form partnerships with
giant Internet portals to expand their offering. What was previously
reserved for large groups can now be applied to SMEs, or even VSEs.
Integrators of secure IP communication solutions like NextiraOne have
specialized in supporting small and medium-sized businesses. The market
is huge, since there are 3.2 million very small businesses in France,
Idate points out in a survey on the telecom and IT uses of VSEs.
However, these VSEs, whose needs are on the border between those of
small businesses and individuals, tend to appropriate the general public
offering. That, for example, of France Telecom via Wanadoo transformed
into Orange on June 1st. Wi-Fi, which allows you to do away with the
wired connection, constitutes another stage in the evolution. It has
advantages including, first of all, flexibility of use. And also speed
and simplicity when it comes to deploying a network in a restricted
space. Depending on the standard used, Wi-Fi can be deployed within a
radius of 10 to 50 meters indoors and up to several hundred meters
outdoors. Finally, for companies, it facilitates the development of mesh
networks to replace centralized and integrated installations. Complex
security One constraint however: that of high speed. And a major
drawback: the complexity of security. Identification procedures must be
put in place for each user. Different levels of access must be provided
within the same company to avoid any intrusion at an unauthorized level
of the system. Furthermore, since it is an open system, defenses against
possible attacks are more complicated to install. \"We are mainly faced
with a problem of network definition and conceptualization,\" emphasizes
Anne Darnige, in charge of innovative services at Anvar. However,
specialists are formal: these security problems will be resolved in the
medium term via quantum mechanics. However, in the world of ICT, the
medium term is always soon.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1519

MICROSOFT ÉRIC PESTEL, founding president of Lookadoc, a non-verbal
communication consulting firm, has opted for peace and quiet. \"I know
absolutely nothing about IT and no one in my organization has a minute
to debug machines,\" he explains. So there was no question of venturing
down side roads, such as free software. His solution? Using an
integrator who offered him tools\... Microsoft dedicated to VSEs and
SMEs. The eight workstations - one per employee - are equipped with the
Office suite, the XP operating system, the Small Business Server and the
Outlook messaging system. To which the integrator added IsiWord, an
application for structuring and automatically formatting documents that
is used to produce, in particular, prospecting mailings. The service
provider ensures the maintenance of the IT system. The option chosen by
Lookadok is far from being an exception, since more than 95% of
companies worldwide are equipped with software or solutions built using
Microsoft tools. Easy-to-install and interoperable products Highly
criticized by the IT community, the American giant has not remained
insensitive to those concerning the price of products or their
malfunctions. Two major points to which small and medium-sized companies
are particularly sensitive. Based on the observation that half of the
structures with fewer than 50 employees do not have an IT manager,
Microsoft has adapted its message to the field. \"Products must be easy
to install and interoperable,\" emphasizes Bertrand Launay, director of
the SME division of Microsoft France. We train our partners - 11,000 in
France - so that they talk above all about uses and functions without
getting bogged down in technology.\" The commercial offers match the
requirements of the target. Microsoft offers multi-year contracts that
include the cost of software updates and the purchase of new versions -
in theory every two or three years. \"Updates are taken into account\"
\"For users who have opted for the annualized Open Value contract,
updates are taken into account and at the rate desired by the
customer,\" explains Bertand Launay. This argument can be used by
companies the size of Lookadoc that are juggling their cash flow. In
2006 alone, Eric Pestel plans to invest 23,600 euros in his IT
equipment, for a turnover close to 800,000 euros. Around 3,400 euros
will have been spent on purchasing or renewing software, 8,200 euros on
maintenance and 12,000 on purchasing hardware. \"The three-year contract
we signed with our service provider allows us to smooth out our
expenses,\" says Eric Pestel happily.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1520

Before them, the web was frozen. Then came the GIFs, flashy, wiggling,
garish, to add a bit of color and movement to the pages. \"In the
mid-\'90s, posting an animated GIF \[Graphic Interchange Format Files\]
on your site was an act of bravery, a way to impress in an era when
pages were static,\" says Marisa Olson, 28, a curator at Rhizome.org, a
new media organization based in New York. The artist-musician is
presenting the exhibition \"GIFs galore! And more!\" in San Francisco
through the end of the month, which testifies to a renewed frenzy around
these animations on the Net. The latest invention is the GIF mashup,
which allows for animated image battles (Mario vs. Bush, for example)
(1) or animated GIF remakes of films like Ghostbusters (2). "Animated
GIFs helped define the look of the Internet with their ability to convey
a dynamic image and information in a small file," Marisa explains. At
the time, from advertising logos to porn banners to people's flashing
home pages, GIFs were everywhere. Artists began to use them,
incorporating them into their music videos, or to design miniature
films. The exhibition presents a video by Paper Rad (3), a collective of
wild graphic designers, adept at wild collages, titled Welcome to my
Homeypage, which showcases their enormous collection of animated GIFs.
"Some of them remind me of pop art," Marisa notes. "Artists are using
images from mass media, reconsidering the relationship between the
individual and the multiple, and using popular, even commercial, forms
to talk about this culture." Most of them don't make their own GIFs;
they appropriate those they find online. This raises the very
contemporary question of copyright and file sharing. Added to this is a
touch of nostalgia for a bygone era, when the Internet was a visual
chaos. Paper Rad, like Cory Arcangel, are rehabilitating this dirt style
(a dirty style that evokes the early Internet), a way of resisting
high-tech chic. This punk spirit also marks the work of the French
artist Jimpunk (4), a terrorist of code, who excels in the art of
deconstructing systems of representation, aesthetics, consumption\...
\"The dividing line between Internet artists and amateurs who use
YouTube, Google Video or Myspace to present their work is increasingly
blurred, notes Marisa, who discovered the pieces of Matt Smear, a
scientist who makes amazing GIFs and combines them with mp3s on his blog
umeancompetitor. \"His GIFs, which he called Giffors, have created a
real cult on the Internet. When he put his manufacturing secrets online,
many blogs took up the recipe but no one can compete.\" For the
exhibition, he created a special blog (5). Because coding GIFs is more
complicated than it seems. Hence this minimal contribution from Cory
Arcangel, artist and Nintendo game cartridge hacker: an open source
email where the artist writes the code for a 4-pixel animated GIF,
without showing the resulting gif. The exhibition is available online,
on a specially dedicated Myspace page, where people can come and post
their own GIFs. \"Myspace is a place where people exchange GIFs like
kids exchanged stickers. There is a spirit of collaboration and
competition to find the most mind-blowing GIFs,\" hence the regular
crashes when you try to connect to the overloaded page. (Gently) punk,
we said. (1) http://gifmashup.eyebeamresearch.org (2)
www.sayagain.co.uk/b3tapix/images/GhostBusters.gif (3) www.paperrad.org
(4) www.jimpunk.com (5) http://yahmobmeancompetitor.blogspot.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1521

How to stay in the race to place computers equipped with Windows in the
hands of populations with low purchasing power? Microsoft, allied in
China with the PC manufacturer Lenovo, has found the solution: sell off
the PC by offering it, for example, at half price. Or put a meter on the
machine and charge for the time of use, via a prepaid card debited over
the minutes like a phone card. The technology, called Flexgo, will be
tested in China and Brazil. Microsoft and its partner are mainly trying
with this initiative to counter the offensive of manufacturers of
ultra-cheap PCs who are giving pride of place to free software and
shunning Windows.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1522

DEVOTEAM Specializing in information systems infrastructures, the
company has developed three types of jobs: upstream consulting for
information systems departments; engineering; production and operations.
To continue its development, Devoteam is looking for people with a
5-year degree from leading schools and universities, 20 to 30% of whom
are recent graduates, and people with a 2-year degree with experience in
production and operations in particular. The company regularly takes on
interns, whom it trains in infrastructures through its partnerships with
publishers and then integrates into its skills centers (management,
security, open source software, etc.). The group has developed offers by
sectoral and regional agencies. For Jean-Michel Apert, HR Director of
Devoteam France, it is clear that tensions are increasing for
experienced profiles. \"Our advantage is having internal training
platforms targeted at our professions and a knowledge sharing system.
\"About twenty consultants lead the knowledge community,\" he explains.
Like Sogeti, Devoteam does not want to enter into a policy of wage
escalation, especially as Jean-Michel Apert notes, since customers\'
purchasing scales do not change much.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1523

What equipment do I need? Any computer, even a slightly old one, PC or
Mac (but equipped with OS X). A 300 MHz processor, 128 MB of RAM and 10
MB of free space on the hard disk are enough. To emit the sound of your
voice, you will need a microphone. The easiest is to buy a headset (from
10 to 40 euros) to hear your correspondent more confidentially. A
lavalier microphone and a pair of speakers will do the job very well.
Last essential element: an unlimited Internet connection and if possible
high-speed. You can also add a webcam (from 25 to 100 euros) to see
yourself while talking. You can even connect a telephone to your
computer, via the USB port (from 35 to 100 euros for a wireless model),
to find the comfort of the handset. I have all the equipment, what do I
do now? You are going to download a free telephony software (also known
as a \"softphone\"). There are several. Since the gateways from one
software to another are practically non-existent, try to use the same
one as your contacts. Some software only allows communications from one
computer to another. Others can also establish contact between your
machine and a landline or mobile phone. Which software should I choose?
Here are the most widespread software on the market, thanks to which you
can contact anyone, anywhere from your computer. All offer free calls
between two and five computers. NetAppel: German software. Beta
(evaluation) version for download. Free calls to landlines in
twenty-eight countries. Available on www.netappel.fr Skype: developed by
the founders of Kazaa, a peer-to-peer software (download from the
Internet). This completely legal software claims 75 million users
worldwide. Calls to landlines and mobiles are billed by the minute.
Available at www.skype.com Wengo: this young subsidiary of Neuf Cegetel
offers flat-rate pricing to sixteen countries, in addition to its
per-minute pricing to others. Wengo is free software (it can therefore
be used, copied, studied, modified and redistributed without
restriction). Available at http://wengo.fr Yahoo Messenger: initially a
simple chat software, Yahoo Messenger has expanded its functions while
retaining its fun side (online games, customization, avatar creation).
Calls to landlines and mobile phones are billed per minute. Available at
http://fr.messenger.yahoo.com How does it work? Calls made from a
traditional telephone go through lines of the Public Switched Telephone
Network (PSTN), dedicated to this use. Communications transmitted by
your computer go through the Internet, among millions of other data of
all kinds. This technology, used by Internet access providers who offer
a telephone service, is called \"voice over IP\" (Internet Protocol).
Its principle: each of your words is chopped into data packets that are
numbered before being sent over the network. Upon arrival, the message
is reconstituted and transmitted to your interlocutor. Each time one of
these packets gets lost in the meanders of the network, the quality
suffers. To limit this risk, free up as much bandwidth as possible on
your computer during the call by stopping any downloading or online
gaming activity. How much does it cost? Regardless of the software you
choose, calls between computers are free, even if you are calling to the
other side of the world. On the other hand, calls to traditional
telephones are chargeable. A minute to France, the United States, China
or Chile, all cheap destinations, costs 0.2 euros per minute with Skype.
And almost half as much with Wengo. But interest in Skype and its clones
has waned since the boxes (Alicebox, AOLbox, Neufbox, Freebox) added a
certain number of international destinations (Europe, United States,
China, Japan, etc., sometimes with mobiles included) to the free calls
to landlines in France. It is better to avoid calls to mobiles, which
are sometimes more expensive than with traditional operators (0.19 euros
per minute with Skype!). You can also have a telephone number assigned
to you to be reached more easily on a handset connected to your PC. An
expensive service (30 euros for a year with Skype). Compared to the
telephone, is it really better? Yes and no. Of course, when you call
from one computer to another, communications are free and unlimited.
During the conversation, you can share photos, texts, or any other type
of file at will. However, the quality is not always up to par. Although
conversations are never unintelligible, you will sometimes have the
impression that your interlocutor is speaking into a tin can, notice an
echo or static. The quality varies depending on the activity (especially
downloading) of your computer but also the time of day. Finally, be
aware that softphones do not allow you to reach certain special numbers,
especially emergency numbers.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1524

AFTER HAVING obtained the closest vote of the entire legislature in the
National Assembly, the controversial bill on copyright and related
rights in the information society was adopted again with a narrow
majority in the Senate, during the night of Wednesday 10 to Thursday 11
May. The text was voted on under emergency procedure (a single reading
in both Chambers before being submitted to a joint committee). One
hundred and sixty-four senators - UMP and part of the RDSE (radicals) -
voted for, while one hundred and twenty-eight - the socialists,
communists and Greens - voted against. The UDF senators, very virulent
during the debates, abstained. The debates were conducted at a brisk
pace on Wednesday afternoon and in the evening. The initial version of
the text was sometimes strongly contested or modified. Thus, the
creation of an administrative authority responsible for regulating
private copying of protected works, as well as ensuring the
effectiveness of interoperability - the ability to read a work on any
medium - was seriously criticized and narrowly adopted (by 164 votes to
159). Greens, communists and centrists tried in vain on Wednesday to
impose in the law a minimum number of authorized private copies. The
text finally provides that this new Authority for the regulation of
technical protection measures, composed of six members - three
magistrates and three qualified figures from civil society - will rule
on a case-by-case basis. Catherine Morin-Desailly (UDF) regretted that
an ordinary citizen can no longer refer the matter to this new entity,
the procedure being reserved for software publishers, manufacturers of
technical systems and service operators. The system of sanctions imposed
on fraudulent Internet users, graduated according to the seriousness of
the offence - the lightest being 38 and 150 euros - was validated by the
senators. The Minister of Culture and Communication, Renaud Donnedieu de
Vabres, however announced that \"the government will create a higher
level of fine, by decree\". REDUCED INTEROPERABILITY The senators also
adopted the principle of creating a public register of protected works
and considered a public download platform. Against the advice of the
government, an amendment by the communist Jack Ralite made it possible
to improve the rights of performing artists. Several amendments by
Michel Charasse (PS) were adopted and aim for greater transparency in
the management of societies for the collection and distribution of
rights (SPRD). Thus, their financial products must be paid in full to
the rights holders. Actions to support creation will be much more
targeted and the information due to partners better supervised.
Following the model of the film tax credit, the Cultural Affairs
Committee laid the groundwork for creating a phonographic tax credit.
Ultimately, since the start of its examination in the Senate, the text
has made it possible to create a new exception to copyright, in favour
of education and research. But, although the minister denies it, the
text has reduced the scope of the measures adopted in the National
Assembly in the area of interoperability. To the point that many
senators, such as Bruno Retailleau (non-registered), have become
concerned about the fate of free software. What was annoying, such as
the global licence, has been abandoned. But certain crucial issues, such
as the financing of culture by Internet access providers, have been
shelved. The task of the joint committee - made up of seven deputies and
seven senators - will not be easy. Mr Donnedieu de Vabres had
nevertheless promised, while he was being attacked from all sides in the
Assembly, a second reading in the Assembly and then in the Senate if the
two texts adopted were too different at the end of the first reading.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1525

\"The ACCUMULATION of technology is disconcerting us and is
disconcerting democracy,\" declared Senator Jack Ralite (PCF,
Seine-Saint-Denis) in a night session on Tuesday, May 9, during the
Senate\'s examination, under emergency procedure, of the bill on
copyright and related rights in the information society. During this
session, the senators limited the scope of the principle of
interoperability (the ability to read a legally acquired work on any
medium or any software) that the deputies had adopted in the first
reading. Mr. Ralite considered that the senators\' vote expressed \"a
clear step backwards compared to the text adopted by the deputies.\"
\"We are faced with the monopoly of giant companies like Microsoft or
Apple, but there is no anti-concentration law,\" lamented the former
minister. Other senators fought to maintain the measures guaranteeing
interoperability. In the ranks of the majority, Yann Gaillard (UMP,
Aube) questioned the merits of creating an additional administrative
authority responsible for ensuring this interoperability. The Assembly
had initially entrusted this mission to the high court. Mr. Gaillard
highlighted \"the deep concern\" felt by defenders of free software.
Bruno Retailleau (non-registered, Vendée) specified that France was
today \"one of the leaders in free software\", used by \"80% of
companies listed on the CAC 40\". He ironically criticized this text
which only offers \"locked protection against anemic freedom\". Senator
Marie-Christine Blandin (Greens, Nord-Pas-de-Calais) feared that the
technical protection measures would in fact constitute \"only a blank
cheque, allowing the implementation of surveillance of Internet users\".
For the Minister of Culture and Communication, Renaud Donnedieu de
Vabres, on the contrary, \"France plays a role of scout and precursor\"
in the field of interoperability. \"This may have been true in the
Assembly, but it will no longer be true in the Senate with the
amendments proposed by the Cultural Affairs Committee,\" retorted Mr.
Retailleau. In addition to the powers given to the new regulatory
authority, this committee wanted to clarify the definition of technical
protection measures and to reduce somewhat the dissemination of
essential information, which risks \"threatening certain industrial
secrets.\" The vote on this thorny issue was not easily won: the UDF
voted against, as did the Communists and the Greens. The Socialists
abstained. Among the other important measures adopted by the senators is
a very old demand from Michel Charasse (PS, Puy-de-Dôme). He convinced
his colleagues to put an \"end to an injustice\" and to change the law
to restore the rights of deceased artists and finally allow the heirs of
\"Coluche, Joe Dassin or Claude François to no longer be harmed.\" The
debates were due to resume on Wednesday afternoon, May 10.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1526

IF THE DEBATES had been heated in the National Assembly before the vote
on the law on copyright in the digital economy, passions calmed down in
the Senate on Thursday, May 4, when the examination of this text
resumed. Renaud Donnedieu de Vabres, the Minister of Culture and
Communication, was able to estimate that the bill \"arrived safely\".
However, many sticking points did not seem to be resolved. The most
spectacular progress was the adoption, although far from obvious, of an
amendment providing a new exception to copyright, in favor of research
and teaching. Defended by the Senate\'s Cultural Affairs Committee, this
amendment, discussed at length and sub-amended, to which the Minister
finally rallied in the evening, plans to take schools and universities
out of a lawless zone that prevails today, particularly in the use by
teachers of films and works in general. From 1 January 2009, the date on
which the recent contractual agreements signed between rights holders
and the national education system - agreements that the Commission
considers unconvincing - will be null and void, it will be possible to
use \"performances or reproductions of short works or extracts from
works (\...) for educational purposes, for the exclusive purposes of
illustration or analysis in the context of teaching and research, to the
exclusion of any recreational or leisure activity, and provided that the
public for which they are intended is strictly limited to a circle
mainly composed of pupils, students, teachers and researchers directly
concerned\". \"FOR INFORMATION PURPOSES\" This use of works must not be
commercial and must be compensated by remuneration to the authors. Such
an exception had been adopted by many member countries of the European
Union, including Germany, Portugal and Luxembourg. In another important
step forward, the senators unanimously adopted identical amendments
presented by the Greens and the Communists in favour of photographers
and illustrators. \"Photojournalism is in danger,\" declared Senator
Marie-Christine Blandin (Greens). She was followed by the exclusion of
photography from an exception to copyright established by the deputies
in favour of press publishers. The adopted amendment authorises \"the
reproduction or representation, in whole or in part, of a work of
graphic, plastic or architectural art, by means of the written,
audiovisual or online press, for the exclusive purpose of immediate
information, and in direct relation to the latter, subject to clearly
indicating the name of the author. This measure will not apply to
photographic or illustrative works which themselves aim to report the
information\". Thus, \"when a report on the Constitutional Council is
shown on television, Buren\'s columns may appear fleetingly\", explained
the minister. This will not prevent the broadcasting of this report. Mr.
Donnedieu de Vabres still has to get 29 articles adopted. Including the
very delicate ones on interoperability (the possibility of reading a
work on any medium) and on free software. In the meantime, a large
demonstration of Internet users is planned for Sunday, May 7, in Paris.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1527

Post coitum, sad parliamentarians? After the orgasmic happening of the
examination by the National Assembly of the bill on copyright and
related rights in the information society (Dadvsi), its arrival today in
the Senate promises to be much more studious. And focused on its central
point: the introduction into French law of technical protection measures
or DRM, these digital locks grafted onto works sold online and on
certain CDs, and intended to limit their copying or uses. Coupled with
repression, they are promoted by the cultural industries as the only
option to curb wild reproduction via the Net. \"Dadvsi Code\". We left
the \"Dadvsi Code\", the nickname of this text, at the end of March
after three months of noise, where an improbable alliance of deputies
from the right and the left had beaten up the poorly put together and
overly repressive project of Minister Renaud Donnedieu de Vabres:
quasi-legalization of peer-to-peer exchanges before Christmas,
suspension of the text, media outcry, long nights of intrigue. And,
finally, a last surprise amendment forcing \"interoperability\", i.e.
the possibility of reading a digital work with any software or hardware.
A provision aimed at putting an end to a practice illustrated by Apple,
whose songs sold on the Music Store cannot be read on any other portable
player than the home iPod. With an irritated press release from the
apple company speaking of \"state piracy\" in the wake and frowns from
Washington. The Senate can no longer ignore the myriad of problems posed
by DRM: privacy (they track works), a brake on private copying (since
DRM limits it from the outset), and the risk of technological control by
Apple or Microsoft. To address all of these difficulties, UMP rapporteur
Michel Thiollière and the Cultural Affairs Committee are proposing the
establishment of an independent administrative authority (a sort of CSA)
responsible for arbitrating the many conflicts to come. This has the
immediate advantage of postponing the details that cause irritation
until later. \"Thing.\" \"A step backwards,\" denounce in particular the
supporters of free software, who fear that arbitration will get bogged
down in an administrative \"thing\" that is too conciliatory with the
cultural majors or technology firms. As a result, several groups of
Internet users and associations promoting free software, supported by
political movements (from young Greens to young UDF) and several
deputies from the right and left, are calling for a \"march for digital
freedoms\" on Sunday in Paris, starting from Place de la Bastille. The
Senate must examine the text until May 10.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1528

Should we try to ban peer-to-peer (P2P) software, accused by the
cultural industries of promoting the free exchange of works? On the eve
of the arrival before the Senate of the highly controversial law on
copyright and related rights in the information society (DADVSI), this
question is causing some friction between a part of the music industry
that would like to get rid of these services and technological players
worried about a brake on innovation. \"Statistically, more than 80% of
content distributed via P2P is illegal, we have to find a solution,\"
argues Jérôme Roger, of the Union of Independent French Producers, one
of the supporters of this measure known as the \"Vivendi amendment\",
because one of the first versions was written by the company. Three
years in prison. Introduced in the Assembly in March and taken up by the
Senate\'s cultural affairs committee, it aims to punish with a maximum
of three years in prison and a fine of 300,000 euros the design, supply
or promotion of software \"clearly intended for the unauthorized
provision of protected works to the public\". \"It is said that it only
targets the \"bad\" publishers who push poor people to piracy, but it
can target any software used to make files available, legally or
illegally, emails, instant messaging, etc.,\" criticizes Stéphane
Marcovitch, of the Association of Internet Service Providers. The same
concern is expressed by supporters of free software, some of whom,
united in the ObjectWeb consortium (from Thales to the Atomic Energy
Commission), reminded senators in a letter that \"the use of data
sharing software and the provision of information to the public are the
very foundations of the Internet\" and that it is \"impossible to
distinguish between legal and illegal use of software\". A way of
reminding people that P2P is also used for the exchange of scientific
information or protected works, but with the consent of the authors. As
is done, for example, by the company Jamendo with a thousand albums made
available for free thanks to the eMule or BitTorrent software, which are
also liable to be prosecuted if the Vivendi amendment is finally voted
through. \"Too easy\". On the side of the supporters of the measure,
they plead good faith. \"It is a question of avoiding any collateral
damage\", asserts Jérôme Roger. \"We want a fair balance, it\'s too easy
to say that we can\'t do anything a priori: let\'s let the magistrates
decide!\" continues Hervé Rony, from the National Union of Phonographic
Publishing (Snep). And both cite as examples cases like Kazaa, condemned
by the Australian courts, or Grokster, in the United States, two
commercial P2P services whose judicial investigations have proven that
they were mainly looking to make money (notably via advertising) on the
back of illegal exchanges of works. But no country, for the moment, has
yet enshrined in law a strict definition distinguishing good software
from bad.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1529

December 1998: software publisher Sun Microsystems files a complaint
against Microsoft with the Commission. According to Sun, Microsoft is
forcing it out of the market by refusing to provide it with information
that would allow its server software to communicate with Microsoft
products (an \"interoperability\" problem). February 2000: the
Commission announces that it is investigating an abuse of the American
group\'s dominant position in the context of the launch of Windows 2000.
August 2000: Brussels sends a first official list of grievances to
Microsoft (based on Sun\'s complaint), which will be followed by more
exhaustive lists in August 2001 (Brussels denounces the integration of
the Media Player software into Windows), then August 2003 (proposal of
corrective measures). March 24, 2004: the Commission finds Microsoft
guilty of abuse of a dominant position in both the interoperability and
Media Player aspects. It imposes a record fine of €497 million and
requests \"corrective measures\". June 8, 2004: Microsoft files an
appeal before the Court of First Instance of the European Court of
Justice (ECJ), asking that its conviction by Brussels be overturned.
June 25, 2004: Microsoft files a second appeal in Luxembourg, requesting
that the corrective measures be suspended pending judgment on the
merits. July 1, 2004: Microsoft pays the fine of half a billion euros.
December 22, 2004: The European Court of Justice deals a first blow to
Microsoft by ordering it to implement the corrective measures before the
case is even judged on the merits. May 23, 2005: The Commission sets an
ultimatum, asking Microsoft to comply fully with its demands by May 31,
or face additional fines. June 1, 2005: After Microsoft\'s final
proposals, the Commission acknowledges that it has made significant
concessions on interoperability. However, it puts a damper on the
matter, considering that it must also provide appropriate documentation
to free software publishers. It temporarily suspends its threat of
fines, pending the ruling of the European courts. June 8, 2005:
Microsoft distributes versions of Windows in Europe purged of Media
Player. October 5, 2005: The Commission appoints an IT expert, Neil
Barrett, to help it verify the correct application of corrective
measures. October 11, 2005: Support for the Commission dwindles.
Microsoft signs peace with RealNetworks, for \$761 million. December 21,
2005: Based on an analysis by Neil Barrett, the Commission sends new
grievances to Microsoft. It orders it to prove, before February 15, that
it is complying with the corrective measures, under penalty of fines of
up to 2 million euros per day. January 25, 2006: Microsoft announces
that it will publish certain parts of the Windows source code. February
15, 2006: Microsoft responds on time to the Commission, which has since
analyzed its response. February 22, 2006: a new complaint is filed
against Microsoft, by an association (ECIS) bringing together IBM,
Oracle and Sun. The complaint targets in particular the Office office
suite as well as Vista, the new version of Windows. March 30-31, 2006:
during a hearing in camera, Microsoft tries to convince the Commission
that it has complied with its requirements. April 24-28, 2006: Microsoft
will try to demonstrate to the Luxembourg judges that the Commission was
wrong to condemn it in March 2004. The judgment is expected in late
2006/early 2007. lefigaro.fr (with AFP)

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1530

Google, Yahoo, Ebay, but also EADS, Lafarge, Alcatel and even the
American NASA. All have chosen MySQL to manage their databases developed
in open source (code source open to all) by this Swedish-American
company of 300 people. A beneficiary, coveted by industry leaders such
as Oracle and SAP, this company, which posted a turnover of 30 million
euros in 2005 and has just raised another 18.5 million dollars, has tens
of millions of users worldwide. With a few others, it embodies the rise
of free software and its promising ecosystem. Interview with its CEO,
the Finnish Mårten Mickos. How would you define the model of this
so-called \"open source\" software? Open source software is a model for
the production and distribution of software, not an economic model in
itself. This distinction is very important. This means that all those
who download our products for free on the Web (50,000 per day) help us
improve them much faster than our competitors\' proprietary software, by
reporting bugs to us. Not only do these contributions considerably lower
our production costs, but they also allow us to make more frequent
updates. It\'s a virtuous circle, a system intrinsically superior to the
proprietary model, more efficient and less expensive. How is this model
so different from Microsoft\'s? If we want to make an analogy, even if
it is a bit excessive, we could say that open source is liberal
democracy in which everyone can vote and put in their two cents, while
closed software is dictatorship: we cannot criticize it or modify it, we
just have to believe the marketing propaganda when it claims \"our
product is the best\". But it is not the strongest who should win, but
the best. Open source is also closer to the ideal market economy as
imagined by Adam Smith and the neoclassicists: in this truly competitive
system, the mediocre product cannot exist, it is automatically
eliminated. The same cannot be said of certain proprietary software
whose exorbitant market shares often have very little to do with their
intrinsic qualities. Is the opposition of these two models, one free and
generous, the other paid and closed, a relevant reading grid to
understand the changes in the software industry? It is outdated to
oppose a free and open model to another proprietary and paid one!
Because nothing is really free in this world. The users who form the
MySQL community may not be paid to help us improve the product, but do
you think they have no interest in doing so? Of course they do. In this
very meritocratic system, the best are quickly noticed, they build a
reputation that will serve them for their career and their CV. The
financial gain is not direct, but it can come later. That\'s the spirit
of free software. How does open source help your company progress? We
live under the permanent control of an installed base of 8 million MySQL
applications worldwide. As owners of a code source open to all, we are
responsible for the cuisine we serve to our customers and they do not
hesitate to put us to the test. Except that with us the kitchen is open,
the ingredients visible! You can\'t hide a failed dish with a pretty
presentation. How does this model of software distributed for free allow
you to make money? We belong to the second generation of open source
which, while remaining faithful to the principles of free software, has
refined and diversified the models quite a bit. We offer two licenses.
The first, under GPL, the General Public License of the Free Software
Foundation of Richard Stallman, corresponds to the system described
above: free use and reciprocity, which means that all modifications of
the code must be made public. Which is what we do. The other system is a
commercial license, which some customers, like Alcatel or Cisco, buy
from us in order to integrate our products into theirs to redistribute
them for a fee, with a closed source code. This is blended or double
software, both free and proprietary, named in reference to whisky. It
provides two thirds of our income today. Another paid model, also
growing, consists of charging the customer not for the software itself,
which remains open source, but for the support and maintenance service
that we sell around it in the form of a subscription. The best part is
that by only distributing one commercial license for every 1,000 GPL
versions, we still manage to make money! This is proof that this model
works. What do you attribute the conversion of an increasing number of
companies to the open source model to? In my opinion, this success is
not only a question of savings. Of course, and this is crucial, our
products, compared to those of IBM, Oracle or Microsoft, cost only 10%
of the price of theirs while offering 90% of their features. But it is
also a question of efficiency and above all of freedom! We are free to
do what we want with them! Aren\'t the big names in software also
tempted to accelerate on this model? The big proprietary publishers have
understood that, in many sectors and for the most standardized
functions, open source would prevail and that they would no longer be
able to compete with it. As a result, they are investing in the model:
they open the source code of closed software as the German publisher SAP
does with its databases, they launch open source programs, including at
Microsoft. And finally, they acquire software or open source companies
like Oracle just did. Things are moving. What gives you confidence in
the future? We are experiencing very big changes with the new generation
of developers and computer scientists. Those who are under 25 have all
tried their hand at open source at university. All start-ups use open
source to avoid cutting their budgets with unnecessary expenses. The new
applications of decentralized and collaborative Internet 2.0 are made in
open source as is the case for the online photo sharing system Flickr,
recently bought by Yahoo. In short, the market is extremely mature and
the revolution, although silent, is no less strong. It would have been
surprising if this new way of questioning the ownership of intangible
goods had been a total flop in the era of knowledge sharing and
information exchange.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1531

www.malaupixel.org Mal au pixel, in Paris until April 29, at Confluences
(190, bd. de Charonne, 75020), at Mains d\'OEuvres (1, rue
Charles-Garnier, Saint-Ouen) and at Ars Longa (67, avenue Parmentier
75011). It all started with this strange word, \"pixel-ache\", literally
translated as \"pixel pain\". Like one\'s liver would hurt after having
an orgy of Easter bunnies. \"This word comes from an article that
predicted neologisms. Pixelache was supposed to be used to describe the
feeling resulting from an overdose of digital media, explains Juha
Huuskonen, Finnish artist and co-organizer of the festival of the same
name. This feeling is familiar to me, especially when the content
becomes monotonous, formatted, and all ends up looking the same. The
Pixelache festival presents projects that question these standards,
break this routine, and expand the way we use media and technology.\"
Created in Finland in 2002 by the Piknik Frequency and Katastro.fi
associations, around DJing and VJing and more broadly electronic
cultures, Pixelache strives to promote new artistic and civic practices
gravitating around free software. For two years, the festival has spread
to Bratislava, New York, Montreal, Stockholm and settled in Paris on
Wednesday. It will stay there until Saturday, April 29 before flying to
Colombia. The French edition Mal au pixel is not a simple transfer of
the Finnish concept, it was set up outside of the big institutional
machines, with limited means, in close collaboration with small local
indie structures involved in new media, Confluen-ces, Mains d\'oeuvres
and Ars Longa with the complicity of Projet 101 and the Finnish
Institute. It\'s funny to see that it\'s a foreign festival that manages
to bring together these initiatives. \"It\'s often easier to work with
someone from outside,\" smiles Mathieu Marguerin, from Mains d\'oeuvres.
\"Moreover, we share the same vision, Pixelache is not an exhibition of
existing works, it\'s one of the rare festivals that shows research in
progress, by presenting projects in development, prototypes, experiments
that question dominant forms. And above all, it is transdisciplinary,
interested in design, architecture, music, activism, hacking, without
focusing exclusively on the artistic sphere. In France, all that remains
very compartmentalized.\" Mal au pixel has as its theme the \"dot org
boom\", the boom in free media, a sort of citizen counterpoint to a
fashionable concept, the commercial \"Web 2.0\". \"The goal of this
event is to kick the proprietary industrial policies of today\'s digital
worlds, DADVSI, DRM, patents, all these things that hurt our pixels,\"
emphasizes Vincent Guimas, from Confluences. The open source phenomenon
is growing rapidly beyond the IT spheres, as is open and collaborative
content (like Wikipedia). A culture of free that most of the invited
artists share (read opposite). They re-appropriate existing tools,
divert their codes, or create their own tools between low-tech tinkering
and free software programming.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1532

Mobile telephony, office software, databases and servers for companies,
administrations and Internet users\... The penguin family of free
software and Linux continues to expand and convert new small ones. Over
the last eighteen months, \$400 million in venture capital has been
invested in free software projects in the United States and France. And
over the last three years, 400 companies have been created, creating
6,000 to 8,000 jobs. The increasing number and sophistication of open
source models is also pushing proponents of proprietary software to open
their codes, such as IBM or Sun Microsystems, which announced at the end
of 2005 that it would almost completely open up its software assets.
Without necessarily being directly opposed to commercial logic, new
practices and uses are emerging. According to a study by the Gartner
institute, the market share of free software should increase from 5%
today to 19% in 2009, or 112 billion dollars worldwide compared to 589
billion for the entire turnover of software and associated services. The
only persistent handicap is that in 75% of cases, free software is used
for new applications rather than to replace old ones. It is better to
create than to migrate\...

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1533

Created by an American couple living in Montreal, the travel guide
Wikitravel.org has been bought by the American Internet Brands, which
will soon add it to its online service offering. Internet Brands,
formerly CarsDirect.com, is a Los Angeles company that specializes in
brokering new cars, properties and mortgages via the Internet. The
company wanted to add a travel guide to its services, and so it bought
the two most popular sites on the Web in quick succession: the American
World66.com and the Canadian Wikitravel.org. These sites, which will
eventually be merged, both use Internet users to write the content of
their pages. This offer was a nice surprise for Evan Prodromou and his
wife, Michele Ann Jenkins, co-founders of Wikitravel.org, who saw the
birth of their first child, Amita, at the same time as they were
negotiating the transaction, last September. \"We started this project
because we are both passionate about travel and website development. We
didn\'t think it would get big, let alone make money from it,\" says
Prodromou, 37. The entrepreneur worked as a programmer in Silicon Valley
before emigrating to Montreal with his future wife - the couple married
in 2004 at the Biosphere on St. Helen\'s Island. \"People often say that
the important thing is to do what you love, and the money will come,\"
he says. \"I always thought that was bullshit. But I was wrong, because
now I get up every morning to work on my own website and get paid.\" The
amount of the Wikitravel.org sale transaction was not disclosed. Laid
off like many others after the bursting of the technology bubble in
2001, the two programmers spent their severance pay on a world tour that
lasted almost a year. It was during this experience that they had the
idea of founding an online guide that would be updated by a community of
Internet travelers, and would not suffer from the publication delays
inherent in printed guides. Editorial independence In addition to the
transaction, the arrangement with Internet Brands provides that the two
founders will continue to supervise the site\'s content as consultants.
The buyer will take charge of the technical infrastructure and
advertising sales - which will be targeted according to travel
destinations - but will not intervene in the content of the site.
\"Wikitravel.org depends on a community of volunteer editors,\"
Prodromou said. \"So we looked closely at the deal to make sure it
wouldn\'t interfere with the content of the pages. Some of Internet
Brands\' executives worked at the Los Angeles Times, so they know what
editorial independence is.\" Wiki\'s open-source technology allows Web
pages to be edited by their visitors in real time. The quality and
accuracy of the content depends on the consensus of people who edit the
pages as the site grows. The most popular application of this technology
is the collaborative online encyclopedia Wikipedia.org. \"Thanks to this
transaction, we will be able to continue to pilot our project, while
being supported by a company that has experience in the field,\"
Prodromou said. Currently, Wikitravel.org has 5,500 registered users in
its English version, and about the same number in the nine other
languages of the site (the French version is at www.wikitravel.org/fr).

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1534

Far from the show-of of the electronic arts grand masses, Mal au pixel
reels off its proposals in several places in the Paris region. More than
the finalized works, the festival is interested in the process, favoring
workshops and seminars to engage the novice or connoisseur public with
the artists. At Mains d\'oeuvres, he will be able to join the
Orgsmobile.org collective to think about the design of the first \"open
source\" vehicle, or how to apply to a concrete object the collaborative
principle of software whose code is open and modifiable. Amy
Franceschini, from Future Farmers, specialized in political video games
(They Rule, Antiwargame\...), will invite him to imagine what a video
game could be transposed into the urban space. He will also be able to
program his own games and animations on the Ping Genius Loci device, an
installation in the public space of 430 physical pixels with colored
faces activated by a motor that react to the passage of visitors. The
desire to get out of the screen to invest the physical space is a
constant. Thus the very playful Kick Ass Kung Fu which awakens the
street fighter in each of us. The player is embedded in the video game
where he must fight formidable adversaries like Bush or Putin. Reverse
kick, nunchaku, shovels, all blows are allowed, sweat guaranteed.
\"It\'s a kind of digital sport\", says Perttu Hämäläinen, specialized
in interactive design and versed in capoeira and karate, who gives us a
breathtaking demonstration of this new acrobatic way of playing video
games. Conversely, Electroscape stages two game consoles, interactive
medium par excellence, over which the spectator has no control: he
watches helplessly an endless babble between two artificial
intelligences implanted in the game machines. Samplings. The playful
form is also the one chosen by Sven König with his impressive
voice-controlled audiovisual sampling software, Scrambled? Hackz!, but
with a resolutely critical perspective. The artist and sociologist is
very interested in the question of intellectual property, but in the
same way that P2P has popularized the idea of exchange and sharing among
young people to the point of becoming second nature, according to him,
\"a software is worth a thousand words\". Digging into a database of
clips from the 80s, the visitor sings a phrase, which he immediately
finds in the mouth of Michael Jackson or Kurt Kobain. Scrambled? Hackz!
pushes the logic of sampling to its limits: it dissects songs into a
multitude of micro-samples (thus avoiding copyright infringements) then
reconstructs them, reproducing the phrases spoken by the user. \"It\'s
becoming a real musical instrument, there\'s no longer any difference
between using samples and playing the guitar,\" explains the author who
will be handling the software live at Confluences on the 26th. The same
commitment to free music is shown by the Iberian collective Platoniq,
which is presenting its Burnstation, a nomadic station that allows you
to freely copy music and burn it onto a CD for free. Burnstation only
offers legal content provided by Netlabels, a non-commercial project
developed in open source that \"brings Internet culture to the streets\"
(Libération, February 10). Nomads. Among the other instruments to be
tested, the Dimi H at the Finnish Institute, by electronic art pioneer
Erkki Kurenniemi, which allows you to play music by waving a red glove
in space. Cécile Babiole and Laurent Dailleau took over and diverted it
during an inaugural concert, saturating the space with red, creating a
superb sound storm. At Confluences, you can create sound loops on the
Four Ophones sequencer (recording combos connected directly to a
speaker) or manipulate the air chambers of the Télégum device to mix
live images from a television stream. As for Flavien Théry and Bruno
Hubert, they explore the nature of white light, with Potentiel and its
mysterious black mirror that reveals what we don\'t see, a way of
re-enchanting reality. The enticing program of sound and audiovisual
performances also shakes up established forms, with artists who elude
any label. Saturday, an evening dedicated to the Parisian
jack-of-all-trades label Active Suspension, where you can belt out
MEC\'s Motor Karaoke installation, a motorcycle racing game where the
one who screams the loudest wins, or, on the 27th, an \"electronic music
and networks\" evening with Carl Y & la boîte blanche, Discom, RyBN\...

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1535

Apple crowned most innovative company! For the second year in a row, the
Boston Consulting Group\'s ranking for the American weekly Business Week
places Steve Jobs\' firm at the top of the world\'s twenty-five largest
groups for their ability to innovate. And it is this famous iPod, its
conception, its marketing and its design that earns it all these honors.
Because what the management of the 1,500 multinationals surveyed are
praising is the multiplicity of changes made at the same time by Apple
with its cult product. First: a new business. The Californian firm had
to conclude commercial agreements with the majors of the record industry
to sell their catalogs on the Internet. Second: a new business model
(each music file sold for 0.99 euros). Third: marketing that has
succeeded in imposing a new style of consumption, all for an object that
is very simple to use. Because today, explain the authors of this study,
it is less technological innovation that makes a company strong than its
ability to quickly transform its habits. And to train its troops to
realize the new idea that will seduce the consumer. The examples
reported in the survey are full of these \"scouts\" who crisscross the
world, Web communities or university labs to sniff out the desires of
future customers. This Who\'s Who of innovation also celebrates the
virtues of brain storming that involves, beyond the circle of the
company, consumers, ethnologists, suppliers or researchers (3M or
Starbucks). Even if, as IBM did, it means throwing some of its patents
to a community of Internet users in the hope of profiting from future
open source developments. To stimulate innovation, other groups invent
very well-paid internal competitions (Nokia) or select, among their
young people, the fresh neurons who will attend the management boards
(Infosys Technologies Ltd). Apple, Google and 3M: all three on the world
podium. No French company in this very Anglo-Saxon ranking which
includes rare European companies, Virgin (n° 11), BMW (n° 16), Ikea (n°
19), and a few Asians (Toyota n° 4, Samsung n° 12, Sony n° 13 and Honda
n° 23).

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1536

AFTER many twists and turns, the bill on copyright and related rights in
the information society (Davdsi) was finally voted on March 21. The text
must now be examined by the Senate in May before being definitively
adopted. In the event of a divergence, a committee may be called upon to
harmonize the text. In the meantime, it raises many questions for
millions of Internet users. Why this law? m It was necessary to protect
artists, publishers and production companies against the problem of
illegal downloading, which continues to grow and is estimated to already
affect 10 million French people. m France, already condemned for its
delay, was obliged to transpose the European directive published in
2001. m The current regulation was unsuitable, providing for a fine of
300,000 euros and three years in prison for fraudsters. What does it
provide? m Support for technical protection measures (or DRM, for
\"Digital Rights Management\"), which limit the unauthorized use of
protected works by preventing their infinite copying and distribution.
However, it is planned that Internet users will be able to duplicate
titles legally purchased under the private copying scheme. m The
obligation for publishers to declare software that integrates technical
measures allowing remote control or access to personal data. m The
obligation to obtain the agreement of authors and performers to use
technical protection measures. m Sanctions against people who illegally
download works protected by copyright, who make pirated files available
to others and who program software intended to exchange them or
circumvent their protection techniques. m In the event of a dispute, a
college of mediators is responsible for arbitrating between rights
holders and users. It will also have to monitor the application of
technical protection measures and the right to private copying. m These
measures should also help develop legal download services such as
Fnacmusic.com, Virgin Mega or Sony Connect, which currently represent 6%
of the music market. What are the risks? m As the law currently stands,
illegal downloading is punishable by a fine of 38 Euros. This sum is
increased to 150 Euros if the pirated files are made available to the
public. m In practice, identifying fraudsters requires Internet service
providers to monitor the activities of their subscribers in order to
identify those who illegally download files. This is a perspective
provided for by the European directive on electronic commerce, which
specifies in particular that \"the prohibition on imposing a monitoring
obligation on service providers\" cannot contradict national
legislation. In short, access providers could be called upon to detect
fraudsters, for example by filtering the addresses of sites known to
illegally provide protected works. Another surveillance system could be
set up to track Internet users who make protected works available to the
public. m However, as with traffic violations, the courts will have to
decide whether the computer owner is liable for acts of piracy committed
using his or her account. m Developers of software designed for
unauthorized file sharing risk a fine of 300,000 euros and three years
in prison. It remains to be seen which software will fall into this
category. And especially whether foreign programmers, who provide the
majority of peer-to-peer software, will be prosecuted. Will we finally
be able to listen to music purchased online on any device? m This is the
will of the public authorities, who have imposed what is called
\"interoperability\", i.e. the possibility of listening to a music file
purchased on Fnac.com on an iPod and files downloaded from the iTunes
Music Store on a Sony portable music player. m According to the law, DRM
publishers (Microsoft and Apple in the lead) will no longer be able to
oppose another publisher designing a player compatible with their
format. It is even authorized to \"decompile\" the DRM code, that is to
say to analyze its operation, to access essential information. This
could be in contradiction with the ban on circumventing DRM. If
necessary, the Competition Council could order the publisher to publish
this information. m This subject mainly concerns Apple, which
manufactures the iPod and administers the iTunes Music Store, and which
refuses to provide other operators and manufacturers with the technical
protection that it uses. According to observers, Apple would then be
forced to change its business model or abandon the French market. This
situation could benefit Microsoft, whose protected Windows Media format
is gradually becoming a standard on other download services. m The law
provides that the conversion of files from one format to another is
permitted, but does not specify the cases where this possibility can be
assimilated to the illegal unlocking of protection measures. m Finally,
the circumvention of technical protection measures does not concern free
software that allows you to listen to music or watch a film with a
program other than the one intended or on a computer other than the one
intended.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1537

Tristan Nitot President of Mozilla Europe, an association for the
development of free software. The blog: Standblog standblog.org Tristan
Nitot, 39, is described by Technorati as an \"evangelist\" of Web
standards. He is interested in browsers, and more generally in Internet
technology. On his blog, the conversations focus a lot on free software,
of which he is a fierce defender, as founder of Mozilla Europe. The
Blogothèque Collective of about twenty bloggers, including Chryde, Manu,
Lilou, Fandor\... The blog: The Blogothèque www.blogotheque.net
\"Digressions, in-depth debates and mp3s\": this is the menu of this
collective and musical blog, which has been sharing its artistic
passions since September 2003 and now attracts 50,000 visitors per
month. Talking about music in a different way, in the blog way, always
offering a link, an image, a video, an excerpt. Pierre Assouline
Journalist, writer, critic. The blog: La République des livres
passouline.blog.lemonde. fr/livres The former director of Lire magazine
became a blogger somewhat by chance, but it didn\'t take him long to
build up a good audience with his daily posts on books and art. La
République des livres has become a must-see in the French-speaking
blogosphere, attracting more and more readers each month. Philippe
Bilger Attorney General at the Paris Court of Appeal. The blog: Justice
au singulier www.philippebilger.com Attorney General at the Paris Court
of Appeal, author of several books, including, with Bruno Gaccio, Le
Guignol et le Magistrat (published by Flammarion, 2004), Philippe Bilger
has been called upon to appear in a number of high-profile cases. On his
blog, he shares his very pertinent thoughts on the state of justice, but
also on the media and society. \"Maître Eolas\" Anonymous author, under
the pseudonym of Maître Eolas. The blog: Journal d\'un avocat
maître.eolas.free.fr \"Lawyer at the Paris bar, passionate about my
profession and enjoying browsing the Web. I have often noted a keen
interest in justice and law in general, an interest left unsatisfied by
the opacity of the subject and the difficulty of understanding, for an
untrained mind - unless it is deformed? - in law.\" This is how the
anonymous Maître Eolas defines himself, who tells \"the behind the
scenes of the Palace\" and has been following legal news since April
2005. \"Versac\" anonymous author The blog: Versac
vanb.typepad.com/versac Versac wishes to maintain a \"relative
anonymity\" which allows him freedom of tone, particularly with regard
to his employer. The blogger gives some clues: \"I had a political
investment in 2001-2002, with Christian Blanc\", first in his think tank
(l\'ami public), then in the political movement that followed (Energies
démocrates). \"I ran in the 2002 legislative elections\", Versac
explains in this notebook, devoted to politics, economics and emerging
democracy, but which also allows for \"digressions around more personal
themes\". Jean-Michel Billaut Creator of the Atelier BNP Paribas. The
blog: Jean-Michel Billaut billaut.typepad.com Subtitled \"vivre la
retraite (à très haut disque, naturel!)\", the blog of Jean-Michel
Billaut, economist and computer scientist, pioneer of the Internet,
within BNP Paribas, offers to discover and meet CEOs, creators,
entrepreneurs, inventors, and films them in video podcasts posted online
on his blog. Bernard Salanié Professor at Columbia (NY) and
Polytechnique. The blog: L\'économie sans tabou bsalanie.blogs.com
Bernard Salanié opened his blog following the publication of his book of
the same name L\'Economie sans tabou (published by Le Pommier, 2004). He
dissects and strives to make economic and political news accessible to
all. Etienne Chouard Professor of computer science in Marseille. The
blog: L\'arc-en-ciel etienne.chouard.free.fr The site of this Marseille
professor played a role during the campaign for the referendum on the
European Constitution in 2005, where he sharpened the arguments for the
no vote. Since then, his blog \"for institutions written by and for
citizens\" has been full.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1538

Jean Véronis 50 years old, professor of linguistics and computer science
(University of Aix-en-Provence) The blog: Language technologies
aixtal.blogspot.com The subject may seem a little austere at first
glance. Jean Véronis\' blog was originally intended primarily for his
students. But its success quickly extended beyond the university.
Because it also talks about Google, search engines and keywords, the
topic has become a central concern for many Internet users. 1,500 visits
per day. Pascale Weeks 40 years old, former IBM employee, now a
professional blogger The blog: C\'est moi qui l\'ai fait!
scally.typepad.com/cest_moi_qui_lai_fait In two years, Pascale Weeks has
carved out a nice reputation as a blogger with her cooking recipes and
photos of small dishes. Her specialty: cookies, and British cuisine in
general. Since its creation, she has written 390 posts that have
generated 4,000 comments. She has also published a book, Cookies,
Muffins and Co, 100 douceurs à la mode anglo-saxonne (éditions First,
2006). Loïc Le Meur 33 years old, HEC, netentrepreneur Blog: Loïc Le
Meur www.loiclemeur.com "Traditional media broadcast messages. Blogs
start discussions," announces Loïc Le Meur in the header of his
extensive blog, the French number one. Loïc Le Meur is obviously the
reference for blogs in France: more than 150,000 visitors per month,
270,000 page views. His "podcats" - audio and video recordings - of
Nicolas Sarkozy and Dominique Strauss-Kahn have been downloaded by
100,000 people each. Roland Piquepaille 59 years old, engineer
specializing in supercomputers Blog: Emerging Technology
blogs.zdnet.com/emergingtech An exception in this selection: a blog in
English. But with his 15,000 page views per day, his 3 million page
views in 2005, Roland Piquepaille is perhaps one of the most widely read
French bloggers abroad and in all countries. His favorite topic: what
new technologies will change in our lives. At the beginning, when he
typed his name into Google, he got 50 references. Today, the query on
his surname returns several hundred thousand responses. Laurent Gloaguen
39 years old, aka \"the Captain\", Paris, France. Blog: Embruns
embruns.net On Laurent Gloaguen\'s blog, we talk about everything and
nothing, politics, leisure, recipes, travel and lots of blogs. Two years
ago, in derision, Laurent Gloaguen launched a committee and a comic
anti-cat campaign. A success, which still earns him letters and comments
on his site. Embruns receives up to 5,000 visitors per day, many of whom
connect from their offices. Pierre Bilger 65 years old, former head of
Alstom The blog: Blog Bilger www.blogbilger.com Initially, Pierre Bilger
mainly conceived his blog as a correspondence with the readers of his
book 4 million euros, the price of my freedom. Then he got into the
game, all the more easily since in a few decades spent at the head of
large state companies, the former head of Alstom had long been bound by
a heavy duty of reserve. No more restrictions, now, on his freedom of
expression: Pierre Bilger talks about the economy of course, but also
about the construction of Europe, industry, business, history, romantic
literature, etc. Tristan Nitot President of Mozilla Europe, an
association for the development of free software. The blog: Standblog
standblog.org Tristan Nitot, 39, is described by Technorati as an
\"evangelist\" of Web standards. He is interested in browsers, and more
generally in Internet technology. On his blog, the conversations focus a
lot on free software, of which he is a fierce defender, as founder of
Mozilla Europe. The Blogothèque Collective of about twenty bloggers,
including Chryde, Manu, Lilou, Fandor\... The blog: The Blogothèque
www.blogotheque.net \"Digressions, in-depth debates and mp3s\": this is
the menu of this collective and musical blog, which has been sharing its
artistic passions since September 2003 and now attracts 50,000 visitors
per month. Talking about music in a different way, in a blog way, always
offering a link, an image, a video, an excerpt. Pierre Assouline
Journalist, writer, critic. The blog: La République des livres
passouline.blog.lemonde. fr/livres The former director of Lire magazine
became a blogger somewhat by chance, but it didn\'t take him long to
build up a good audience with his daily posts on books and art. La
République des livres has become a must-see in the French-speaking
blogosphere, attracting more and more readers each month. Philippe
Bilger Attorney General at the Paris Court of Appeal. The blog: Justice
au singulier www.philippebilger.com Attorney General at the Paris Court
of Appeal, author of several books, including, with Bruno Gaccio, Le
Guignol et le Magistrat (published by Flammarion, 2004), Philippe Bilger
has been called upon to appear in a number of high-profile cases. On his
blog, he shares his very pertinent thoughts on the state of justice, but
also on the media and society. \"Maître Eolas\" Anonymous author, under
the pseudonym of Maître Eolas. The blog: Journal d\'un avocat
maître.eolas.free.fr \"Lawyer at the Paris bar, passionate about my
profession and fond of wandering on the Web. I have often noted a keen
interest in justice and law in general, an interest left unsatisfied by
the opacity of the subject and the difficulty of understanding, for a
mind not trained - unless it is deformed? - in law.\" This is how the
anonymous Maître Eolas defines himself, who tells \"the behind the
scenes of the Palace\" and has been following legal news since April
2005. \"Versac\" anonymous author The blog: Versac
vanb.typepad.com/versac Versac wishes to maintain a \"relative
anonymity\" which allows him freedom of tone, in particular with regard
to his employer. The blogger gives some clues: \"I had a political
investment in 2001-2002, with Christian Blanc\", first in his think tank
(l\'ami public), then in the political movement that followed (Energies
démocrates). \"I ran in the 2002 legislative elections\", explains
Versac in this notebook, devoted to politics, economics and emerging
democracy, but which also allows for \"digressions around more personal
themes\". Jean-Michel Billaut Creator of the Atelier BNP Paribas. The
blog: Jean-Michel Billaut billaut.typepad.com Subtitled \"vivre la
retraite (à très haut disque, naturel!)\", the blog of Jean-Michel
Billaut, economist and computer scientist, pioneer of the Internet,
within BNP Paribas, offers to discover and meet CEOs, creators,
entrepreneurs, inventors, and films them in video podcasts posted online
on his blog. Bernard Salanié Professor at Columbia (NY) and
Polytechnique. The blog: L\'économie sans tabou bsalanie.blogs.com
Bernard Salanié opened his blog following the publication of his book of
the same name L\'Economie sans tabou (published by Le Pommier, 2004). He
dissects and strives to make economic and political news accessible to
all. Etienne Chouard Professor of computer science in Marseille. The
blog: L\'arc-en-ciel etienne.chouard.free.fr The site of this Marseille
professor played a role during the campaign for the referendum on the
European Constitution in 2005, where he sharpened the arguments for the
no vote. Since then, his blog \"for institutions written by and for
citizens\" has been full.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1539

Blogs, new masters of thought. On his site, in July 2002, Tristan Nitot,
president of Mozilla Europe, an association dedicated to the development
of free software, noted a tip every day for better use of Internet
browsers. Around fifty Internet users were there every day. A small base
of loyal followers, already, who encouraged him to persevere. Today, his
posts on Web standards can attract up to 25,000 visitors per day. \"I
didn\'t do anything special for this,\" explains Tristan Nitot. \"This
craze is a surprise to me.\" Is the blog becoming a new vector of
influence? Among the 6 to 7 million blogs listed in the French
blogosphere, some have in any case become musts, essential, very
influential. For the most part, their creators did not seek it. It
happened like that, all at once, or on the contrary patiently, over the
weeks, through the posts published, the comments and the responses left.
On their blogs, they talked about new technologies, sustainable
development, literature or music, cooking or simply the spirit of the
times. Some told their life stories, confided their feelings. Some were
already known, most anonymous. And then, one day, they realized that
their words were read, that their opinion counted. They had acquired
notoriety, they had become influential bloggers. \"It wasn\'t
intentional, but I\'m delighted and I got into it,\" admits Jean
Véronis, professor of linguistics and computer science at the University
of Aix-en-Provence. On his blog, Aixtal, devoted to language
technologies, 1,500 Internet users consult some 4,500 pages every day.
Aixtal had his moment of glory: he was the one who pointed out some of
Google\'s aberrations and demonstrated that the search engine was
\"inflating\" its figures. The story was published by the New York
Times, and Google corrected its press releases downwards. Success is
often \"a niche success\", according to Chryde, one of the hosts of the
Blogothèque, a collective blog dedicated to independent music, visited
every day by 2,500 Internet users. For Chryde, the adventure began in
September 2003. The young man had two passions: blogs and music. \"The
idea,\" he explains, \"was to talk about music differently, in an
intimate, transversal and offbeat way.\" It didn\'t take long for the
music site to find success. \"I think we\'ve renewed the way we talked
about music until then,\" analyzes Chryde. On the blogothèque, we don\'t
talk about a piece of music if we can\'t give people a listen, show a
clip. We were lucky to create something at the right time.\" Today,
there are about fifteen volunteers contributing to the collective.
Record companies, who can no longer ignore them, invite them to
conferences and previews. The real influence of blogs is difficult to
measure precisely. Because here as elsewhere, influence does not
necessarily rhyme with affluence. \"Audience is only one of the criteria
we take into account to select a site, but it is far from being the only
one,\" explains Sandra Albertolli, head of the Influence agency, which
defines itself as an \"agent of influential blogs and sites.\" \"We also
check its referencing in the main search engines. We observe the quality
of the texts, the graphics. We also have to take into account the
expertise of the blogger and evaluate that of his readers,\" she adds.
There are only a few tools to precisely and objectively evaluate the
audience of a blog. The rare measuring instruments are American and
often ignore the small French blogosphere. The best known of these
tools, Technorati - which is also a search engine dedicated to blogs -
lists, to establish its ranking, the number of links and sites referring
to a personal page. In the \"top 100\" established by Technorati, there
are no French people. The blog of Loïc Le Meur, famous
\"netentrepreneur\", is considered the reference of the French
blogosphere: it was, at the end of February, in 598th position in the
Technorati ranking, with 4,021 links from 1,111 sites. Embruns, the
personal notebook of Laurent Gloaguen, one of the most popular blogs in
France, was in 2,363rd place with 1,564 links from 447 sites. With a
little digging, we could also locate Tristan Nitot\'s Standblog in
1,634th position, Jean Véronis\'s language technologies in 3,024th, or
Roland Piquepaille\'s scientific blog - in English, however - in 3,121st
place. A ranking that is certainly not set in stone. \"A blog can have a
large audience because it talks about a fashionable or current topic.
This will propel it to the top of search engines, but it is not a
quality criterion, and the effect can fade just as quickly,\" judges
Frédéric Montagnon, one of the three founders of Over-Blog, one of the
largest platforms in France. \"Influence cannot be measured, but felt,\"
believes Chryde. Pascale Weeks, creator of \"C\'est moi qui l\'ai
fait!\", did not imagine having to deal with this somewhat complex and
vague notion. Three times a week, she publishes cooking recipes. She
must have found a pleasant tone, original recipes, because from 30
visits per week when the site opened in March 2003, her blog grew to
more than 4,000 visits and 8,000 page views per day. Not enough, after
all, to see herself elevated to the rank of opinion leader. However, one
day, the former IBM employee mentioned in a post the name, brand and
place of purchase of a paring knife that she particularly liked. The
store mentioned quickly ran out of stock! With blogs, notes Pierre
Assouline, author of La République des livres, \"the impact is
immediately measurable\". Writer, journalist, columnist, the former
director of the monthly Lire easily transposed into the virtual universe
the influence he already had in the literary world. From the start, in
September 2004, success was there: 4,000 page views per day on average.
He has not denied it and today reaches 8,500 page views per day, 250,000
per month. \"But you have to write every day,\" explains the literary
critic. \"There is in fact a very strong correlation between the rate of
publication and the number of visits,\" confirms Pierre Bilger, the
former boss of Alstom. His economic and financial blog initially focused
on issues of high salaries, particularly following the publication of
his book, 4 million euros, the price of my freedom (ed. Bourin, 2004).
But since the summer of 2005, his posts have diversified, and Pierre
Bilger no longer hesitates to talk about television or literature. Long
bound by a duty of reserve, the former civil servant believes he owes
the success of his posts to his finally free speech: each month, 8,000
to 10,000 visitors go to his blog.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1540

The term \"free software\" comes in the middle of a debate on copyright
on the Internet. Explanations. - Free software is software like any
other (word processors, image editing and video playback tools, etc.),
except that everyone can use it freely, on any computer. But also,
modify it and distribute it, just as freely. Most free software is free.
However, it should not be confused with \"freeware\": for a program to
claim free software status, its source code (i.e. the instructions that
determine its operation) must be public. Everyone can thus study its
action and adapt it to their needs. This is not the case for many free
software programs, delivered only in the form of an executable file. -
It was a former MIT programmer, Richard Stallman, who first stated the
principles of free software in the 80s, inspired by the academic
tradition of freely distributing research work. The best-known free
software is undoubtedly Firefox, which is gradually replacing Internet
Explorer: it is indeed faster, more secure and more ergonomic. But the
most emblematic remains the Linux operating system (or more precisely
GNU/Linux) whose latest developments, such as the Mandriva or Ubuntu
versions, bring the user-friendliness that it sorely lacked. - Renowned
for their quality and reliability, free software is increasingly used by
companies and administrations to manage their servers and websites or
equip workstations. Most of the applications at the heart of the
Internet are also free software. Tested on a large scale, they also
stand out for the responsiveness of their programmers in the event of a
malfunction or security problem. With commercial software, the user must
wait for the publisher to release a new version or a patch. - If free
software is invited into the current debate on copyright, it is because
it is the only one capable of simply and cost-freely solving a
fundamental problem linked to what is called \"interoperability\". Both
to protect copyright and for technical reasons, videos or digital music
tracks designed to be played on Windows do not necessarily work with a
Mac or systems like Linux. Some files can even only be opened by a given
program and that program alone. Developers have therefore developed
software to get around these incompatibilities and thus give users
back\... their freedom.DS

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1541

The law on copyright and related rights in the information society
(DADVSI), adopted in first reading by the deputies on Tuesday March 21
(Le Monde of March 23), establishes fines targeting fraudulent Internet
users according to the seriousness of their act. As the text stands,
three of them will be difficult to apply. An Internet user who downloads
a protected work for personal use is liable to a fine of 38 euros.
However, technically, it is impossible to detect the act of downloading
without requiring Internet service providers (ISPs) to systematically
monitor the activity of their subscribers. However, this request is
\"excluded by the European directive of 2000 on electronic commerce\",
says Stéphane Marcovitch, general delegate of the French Association of
Access Providers (AFA). An Internet user who makes a protected file
available to the public, without commercial intent, is liable to a fine
of 150 euros. This act can be detected by automated surveillance
devices, independent of access providers. But, says Christophe Pallez,
Secretary General of the National Commission for Information Technology
and Civil Liberties (CNIL), \"to be dissuasive, a large-scale system
would have to be set up. We can ask ourselves questions about the
feasibility of such a system\" which requires a lot of personnel and
significant technical and financial resources. Especially since ISPs
charge the police or the courts \"around 50 euros\", says Stéphane
Marcovitch, for each request to identify an Internet user. Another
problem: the law does not say whether the holder of an Internet
subscription is presumed responsible for an offence committed from their
personal account. Authors\' societies had submitted to the CNIL such a
surveillance system limited to certain peer-to-peer (P2P) software -
used to exchange protected files - but their deployment had not been
authorised. \"We are no longer in this framework,\" Mr. Pallez
specifies, \"but in that of offenses noted by the police.\" In this
case, this surveillance would be authorized. The most difficult part
remains: finding an automated and efficient system to note the offenses.
\"The wide variety of technical protocols for exchanging files makes it
very complex, if not impossible, to set up a single surveillance
system,\" says Christophe Espern, a member of the Fondation pour le
logiciellibre, which opposes the bill. In addition, adds Mr. Espern,
\"Internet users will turn to encrypted and anonymous systems.\"
Software such as Mute, Ants or Grouper make it impossible to
systematically detect the availability of protected works. A specialist
in the matter explains that the government could always choose to put a
few judicial police officers in an office, who will manually issue
tickets. \"If that is the case,\" he comments, \"the law will be
counterproductive: the probability of being fined will be very low and
the amount of the fines is not really dissuasive.\" The text finally
provides that the publication, marketing or distribution to the public
of software \"clearly intended\" for unauthorized exchanges of protected
music or films is subject to criminal sanctions (up to three years in
prison and a fine of 300,000 euros). But the majority of P2P software
publishers are not French. In addition, the distribution of these
programs is often done through websites hosted abroad. \"Our greatest
fear,\" says Mr. Marcovitch, \"is to see court decisions forcing us to
filter the Internet to make this or that site inaccessible, on the
grounds that it makes certain software available.\" Such constraints
would be \"ineffective,\" according to him. \"On the one hand, when we
block a site, we block all sites hosted on the same server, including
those that have nothing to do with the crime,\" he explains. \"On the
other hand, by the time we block the site, the software declared illegal
will have migrated to other servers and will ultimately still be
accessible.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1542

\"We were waiting for Malraux, it was Maginot!\" summarized the PS
deputy Christian Paul, on December 21, 2005, in the middle of examining
the bill on \"copyright and related rights in the information society\"
(DAVDSI). The very late transposition of the European directive of 2001
into French law, narrowly voted on Tuesday March 21 by the deputies -
the closest vote of the legislature -, has become one of the worst
parliamentary nightmares of the Villepin government. The challenge was
enormous: it was nothing less than adapting the law to combat piracy
practiced by more than 10 million French people, accustomed to
downloading music or films for free on the Internet. Few of them have
been prosecuted so far, but all risked up to three years in prison and a
fine of 300,000 euros. As in any good Shakespearean dramaturgy, nothing
was spared: \"traitors\" blew up a seemingly well-oiled scenario; twists
and turns followed one after the other; parties tore each other apart;
lobbies maneuvered with more efficiency than discretion. The lack of
preparation of the text and the litany of blunders reached new heights.
Wednesday, December 21. The French are more busy with their Christmas
shopping than looking at a technically complex bill. However, the
deputies are there and already irritated by the methods used to hastily
swallow a text that so closely concerns young people and the future of
culture. The oldest remember that Jack Lang had succeeded, in 1985, in
having the current law on copyright passed unanimously. This time, we
are not taking that path. The fact that the Virgin group set up in the
Assembly to demonstrate paid downloading has irritated more than one
person. However, Pierre-Christophe Baguet (UDF) denounced en bloc \"four
years of delay, three nights devoted to this text on the eve of the
end-of-year holidays, amendments tabled at the last minute\". The
session was stormy. Many deputies were beginning to understand that
their children or grandchildren were in fact delinquents who did not
know it. With the new bill from Renaud Donnedieu de Vabres, the Minister
of Culture, these sanctions will also apply to Internet users who bypass
DRM (Digital Rights Management), these \"technical protection measures\"
for protected works: before you can illegally download music or a film,
a hacker must have bypassed the digital locks that protect these works.
Which is unlikely to be very popular at a time when Santa Claus will be
placing thousands of MP3 players under the Christmas trees. UMP MP Alain
Suguenot and the Socialists are defending a similar amendment for once,
which opens the way to the \"global license\": the first article of the
law authorizes downloading in exchange for a monthly fee of a few euros
for rights holders. First twist, the amendment is voted. Against the
government\'s advice. Twenty-two UMP MPs have gone over to the
\"enemy\". It is a resounding slap in the face for the Minister of
Culture. The entire architecture of his bill is called into question.
\"RDDV\" is pale. The global license, like the European question, has
caused the parties to implode. The PS group and its \"three musketeers\"
Patrick Bloche, Didier Mathus and Christian Paul, are in favor of it.
The party\'s leading lights, François Hollande, Jack Lang, Catherine
Tasca and Anne Hidalgo, in charge of culture, are hostile to it: the
global license would, in their eyes, contribute to quickly burying the
record and film industry. Anne Hidalgo organizes a counter-fire as soon
as the amendment is voted on, by bringing together musicians and
filmmakers at the Café Le Bourbon, a stone\'s throw from the National
Assembly. The government is furious, but Bernard Accoyer, the president
of the UMP group, is not in favor of a second deliberation - a second
vote - which would amount to making the rebellious deputies eat their
hats. Frédéric Lefebvre, Nicolas Sarkozy\'s parliamentary advisor,
called to the rescue, suggests in vain to rewrite the article and vote
again during the night. The government decides to suspend examination of
the project indefinitely. \"RDDV\" is asked to review its copy. It is
suggested at Matignon to considerably ease the sanctions against
Internet users who download illegally. While waiting for the debates to
resume, an intense lobbying activity begins. For two and a half months,
each side will jealously defend its interests. On one side, Public
Alliance Artistes, ardent advocate of the global license, brings
together family associations, performing artists\' rights management
companies, Spedidam and Adami, who hope to manage this new tax for the
benefit of their members, the consumer advocate of UFC-Que Choisir and
the EUCD.Info association, which campaigns for free software. On the
other side, representatives of the music industry, cinema, and all other
authors\' societies, led by Sacem, are very hostile to this tax. Each
camp mobilizes thousands of artists. \"Sacem has clearly manipulated
them,\" Didier Mathus told the PS. \"We have only heard the
profession\'s bank accounts. » In violation of the Assembly\'s rules,
Jacques Blache, the Sacem lobbyist, repeatedly discussed with members of
the Minister of Culture\'s office in the Salle des Quatre-Colonnes,
reserved for parliamentarians and the accredited press. An amendment
aimed at penalizing publishers and promoters of software distributing
unprotected files was even somewhat cryptically named the \"Vivendi
amendment\". For their part, the representatives of the cinema industry
proved effective: as if by magic, the global license suddenly only
concerned music. The world of Internet service providers (Wanadoo, Free
and others) also escaped in extremis a tax for cultural creation copied
from the obligations imposed on televisions to finance cinema.
Manufacturers were not left out. Equipment manufacturers were working
behind the scenes to continue marketing DVD and CD copiers. Apple,
backed by the enormous success of its iPod, is up in arms against
\"interoperability\" - the ability to play a song on any device. The
manufacturer will ultimately not win its case: two amendments will be
voted on in the snatch on March 17 at dawn. Before the debates resume,
Renaud Donnedieu de Vabres tries to explain that his revised bill has
found \"a good balance\" between creators, Internet users and cultural
industries. Fraudsters no longer risk prison, but a simple fine: 38
euros for a simple pirate download, 150 euros when these files are
available to others - which is almost always the case with software
currently in circulation. To convince, the minister launches a dialogue
site, téléchargement.com, inaugurated with great fanfare at the Palais
de Tokyo on February 22. Very quickly, it was the tables turned: the
supporters of the global license swooped on the site to say all the bad
things they thought about his bill. In the Assembly, Bernard Accoyer
restored a bit of discipline to the UMP and reached a consensus to
abandon the global license, the principle of which had nevertheless been
adopted. Christine Boutin remained alone, joined late by UMP Nicolas
Dupont-Aignan, to defend this license with the Greens, the PS and the
communists. \"I didn\'t mind voting like them, but they had to stick to
it,\" she said. When the text returned to the Assembly on March 7, there
was another dramatic turn of events: the government announced the
withdrawal of the first article, which had paved the way for the global
license. Martine Billard (Greens) and Christian Dutoit (PCF) had every
right to denounce the \"government\'s forcing through\". The President
of the National Assembly, Jean-Louis Debré, was forced to embark on a
course in constitutional law: \"It was probably the procedure most
likely to ensure the sincerity and clarity of the debates,\" he assured.
The opposition went wild and promised to lodge an appeal with the
Constitutional Council. On the government bench, the Minister of Culture
swallowed the snakes one after the other: Pierre Mazeaud, President of
the Constitutional Council, telephoned him on March 8 to inform him that
the withdrawal of an article currently under examination might indeed be
unconstitutional. The next day, with a gloomy face, the Minister
announced in session that he was reintroducing the article withdrawn two
days earlier. A godsend for his opponents. And, on March 9, began one of
the most absurd episodes that parliamentarians have ever experienced:
the government asked them to examine a text in order to better vote
against it. After hours of socialist obstruction, UMP MP Yves Bur, who
chaired the session, blurted out into the microphone, exasperated: \"But
what the hell is this?\" Despite the mind-boggling nature of the chosen
procedure, the global license was buried early in the evening. Article
One was rejected in the absence of PS, PCF, Green and UDF MPs, who left
the Chamber ranting: \"You are dishonoring the Assembly!\"; \"It\'s
scandalous!\". Once the storm had calmed, everyone was passing the buck
for the fiasco. But the one who came out of the ordeal the most
exhausted was the Minister of Culture. He will have to resume examining
the text in May, this time in the Senate.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1543

London special correspondent As they have done every month for the past
five years, they meet at LimeHouse TownHall, in a remote corner of the
East End, near the Thames docks. In the large, icy hall of this former
disused town hall, taken over by groups of artists and activists after
having been a boxing club in the 80s and an emergency shelter for the
homeless, a motley crew, albeit mainly male, and \"trendy\" in the
literal sense, swarmed last weekend. Bearded and bushy with greasy hair
and shabby sweatshirts, coder in colorful pants and dreadlocks,
intellectual and arty nerds, engineer fussing over his worrying
installations, or bald guy with glasses in quilted gabardine, checking
for the umpteenth time the suspicious connections of his machines, they
wouldn\'t miss a Dorkbot for anything in the world (dork for \"poor
guy\", and bot for automaton). From Berlin to Bahia. Launched in New
York in 2000 by Douglas Repetto, research director of the Center for
Computer Music at Columbia University, Dorkbot is an informal club of
artists, tinkerers and geeks \"who do weird stuff with electricity,\"
according to their slogan. The club has spread throughout the world,
with more than thirty cities (from Berlin to Bombay, from Medellín to
Melbourne, from Sofia to Bahia) opening their cells, offering a platform
to all these mad scientists, half-artists, half-genius tinkerers, whose
\"works\" elude any attempt at labeling. This weekend, the London cell,
the first international replica of \"Dorkbot NYC,\" founded by the
artist programmer Alex McLean and the netactivist Saul Albert,
celebrated its fifth anniversary. \"In London, lots of people were
tinkering in their corners, but there was no event open enough to
welcome their inventions: too weird for art galleries, and not serious
enough for science museums. At Dorkbot, we often present unfinished
projects, the intimate and friendly context gives people confidence\",
explains Saul Albert. The underground event, organized by volunteers
which initially brought together around fifty aficionados, is attracting
more and more people. There were more than 200 on Saturday, and almost
as many the next day hanging out at Dorkfest, one of the many events of
Node.London, a multimedia season held throughout the month of March
(read opposite), jargoning resistance, high voltage and binary poetry,
discussing free software and recycling with the gurus of electricity.
\"Precious garbage\". Among them, the excellent James Larson, a
38-year-old bachelor, a Dorkbot London veteran; he has attended almost
every session assiduously. \"I come here because I have nowhere else to
go,\" laughs the electronics engineer with the shiny skull, pulling his
trousers up to his chest, in front of an audience charmed by his very
\"British\" humour, his nerdy jokes, full of self-mockery, and his crazy
inventions. A passion for machines that goes back to his early
childhood. Most of the objects he uses, his \"precious rubbish\", he
picks up in the street, \"before the dogs have corrupted them\".
\"Often, they are a little broken, but they are rarely completely
dead\", explains this specialist in random connections. He does not seek
to repair them but rather to find new unusual functions for them.
Connect an amplifier with a CD player and an old sixties TV to obtain
magnificent vector arabesques (or how to transform your TV into a
Vectrex), or a musical keyboard, with an amplifier and an old computer
screen, to generate synchronized psychedelic visuals. \"In the early
80s, the CD player was an exotic, glamorous thing, only the rich had
one, today it\'s nothing. We throw away equipment every two years to buy
new ones, we consume more and more. 99% of things thrown away can be
reused, we can learn with them, have fun. My mission is to come to their
rescue.\" In front of a hilarious audience, he reveals how to create a
sophisticated clock from a rotting shrimp mayo sandwich. To avoid
blunders during his (rare) romantic dates, he has developed a system for
detecting his partner\'s stress, by stuffing a fork and knife with
sensors. An invention that he tests, in the absence of a romantic date,
\"on \[his\] mother\" one Christmas Eve. His next challenge, to build a
\"Romulan Disrupter\", a nod to Star Trek fans, a weapon based on energy
discharge. Poetic prototypes. Unlike the Lépine competition, the
\"works\" presented at the Dorkbot, despite their high sophistication
and the hours of work involved, have no commercial application,
prototypes without functionality, beautiful, funny, poetic and most of
the time totally useless. Mike, aka Dr High Voltage, is a fan of
Larson\'s shows. His specialty? High voltage, as indicated by the slogan
on his garish yellow T-shirt. The electronics engineer is active like a
battery around his display, manipulating ultra-dangerous electrical
systems before the terrified eyes of the audience. \"The Destruct-O-Tron
(1) is an accumulator that stores enough energy to kill you instantly,\"
he warns, almost electrocuting himself, not to be done at home. Mike\'s
thing is to smash everything. After connecting a coil to his
Destruct-O-Tron, the festival begins, crushing cans, disintegrating CDs,
spectacular explosion of guitar strings that the audience can admire in
slow motion thanks to a makeshift camera that dissects the movement up
to a thousand frames per second. In life, Mike does \"boring stuff for
industrial companies,\" and, since the age of five, he has spent most of
his free time dismantling machines: \"When I buy something, the first
thing I do is take it apart to see what\'s inside. Today, kids prefer to
press buttons.\" Mr. 1 million volts has also imagined an unusual
instrument, the Spark-O-Phone, or how to make electrons jazz,
lightning-making machines, flame tubes, based on Jacob\'s ladder and
flammable gas. Mike discovered Dorkbot on the Net, finds that their
slogan applies perfectly to his experiments. Even if it would be more
accurate to say \"people who do weird things with technologies in
general\". Young people are more likely to work on software than
hardware, they too get their hands dirty, dexterously manipulating
computer code. Strongly represented at Dorkbot, the free software
community, artists and developers who create their own open source tools
(to copy, distribute and modify freely). Like Fluxus, presented by Alex
McLean and Dave Griffiths, which allows you to program sound and image
live. The audience can read the score live and appreciate the result
simultaneously. Another audiovisual performance, the hypnotic one by
Chun Lee and Oli, from the artistic collective Goto10, using other
software such as Processing or PureData. The (two) girls on the program
proved that female under-representation was not inevitable. \"We had a
competition one day to see which Dorkbots had the highest percentage of
girls. London came out on top by a wide margin, with 15%, rejoices Saul.
The women who come to present their projects are often accomplished
artists, we would also like to invite those who tinker in their
bedrooms. That\'s why we put out a call for Dorkettes. Our goal is to
reach 50-50.\" The pretty Mileece captivated the audience with her
musical philodendrons (2). Stuffing the green plant with electrodes, she
exploits their electrical potential. \"Plants react to their
environment, I wanted to transform their reaction into music.\" Fiddling
with a sheet of paper, she shows how stress alters the result. \"It\'s
really weird, what happens with plants, they react to my emotional
state, or when I have my period.\" The audience, who bombard her with
questions, will also learn that some plants are punkier than others and
that the only recipe for plants to stay alive is love. Three-headed
dragon. More poetry, although below the belt this time, with the
ineffable Yoshi, the undisputed star of the evening, the only retiree
who has a resident card at the Ministry of Sound club, \"they like my
look and my way of dancing drum & bass,\" he laughs, parading around in
his customised orange work trousers with flashing LEDs and embroidery
representing a woman\'s body. \"Since I\'m an old pig, the hairy Velcro
on the back pocket immediately inspired me.\" Unveiling his new
sculpture, the Japanese with the long ponytail presents his version of
Cupid. Two automatic arms that bend a bow with a penis topped with an
inflatable condom as an arrow. He also has a motorized dinosaur skeleton
to his credit, a three-headed dragon that moves, a sculpture of women\'s
legs that wiggle when air is blown in\... Formerly a photographer, the
inventor, passionate about botany and a sociology graduate, tinkered
freelance with sophisticated prototypes for the big Japanese photo labs
(Canon, Minolta, Pentax). Labs that ended up criticizing him for working
for the competition. \"I decided then to move away from these commercial
considerations, and to do only useless things. Art is not a commercial
activity, it is a pure intention, devoid of any commercial ulterior
motive,\" analyzes the creator, a follower of Zen Buddhism. photos
Michael Grieve (1) www.electricstuff.co.uk (2)www.mileece.net

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1544

London special correspondent Throughout the month of March, electronic
arts are taking place online, in the galleries and streets of London.
Despite a thriving scene, no major event has ever been dedicated to it.
This is now the case with Node.London (\"node\" being the acronym for
\"networked, open and distributed events\"). Node.L takes the opposite
approach to the big gatherings of the genre, by proposing a
collaborative, voluntary and completely decentralized organization
model, inspired by the open source philosophy. \"Anyone can join through
the website, become an organizer and propose an event in turn. There is
no theme, no curator,\" explains Tim Jones, coordinator. \"The aim is to
make visible the diversity of proposals and to establish a dialogue
between the different actors.\" The season brings together more than 150
projects in forty locations in the city, crossing alternative venues and
institutions such as the ICA, the Tate and the Science Museum. \"No star
system, everyone had their say,\" says Ruth Catlow, from the Net-art
group Furtherfield.org, curator of the HTTP gallery, \"it allows for the
cross-fertilization of circles, artists, programmers, hackers, activists
working locally with communities.\" A gentle chaos that is the charm and
the puzzle of the festival, the public must also fit into this project
and find its way among the workshops, performances, conferences,
scattered throughout the four corners of the megalopolis. A look at the
ICA, which is showing Everlandia, a tool that lets you create your own
virtual paradise and print it on a postcard; a romantic audio tour of
the former Wapping docks; a cutting-edge evening devoted to sound and
video experiments at the very chic Whitechapel Gallery; an exhibition of
Andy Deck\'s artistic software at the HTTP gallery, set up in a
warehouse in north London; a trip to Dorkfest in the East End; a trip to
the noise workshop at the premises of Mongrel, pioneers of net-art who
have exiled themselves to Southend, in the \"least fashionable county in
England\", an hour\'s train ride from the capital. Their Jelliedeel Shed
studio is located in an industrial complex surrounded by plumbers\' and
construction workers\' workshops. \"Typical Mongrel,\" smiles Graham
Harwood. Far from the London hype, the committed collective, working
with the underprivileged and the left behind, is preparing a new project
with the Congolese community, Telephone Trottoire, a system that allows
Congolese news to be circulated and commented on by telephone, launched
tomorrow, as well as Hairy MPs, a website that allows the assiduity of
British parliamentarians to be monitored: the more they attend sessions,
the more their hairiness grows. \"Node.L is a great initiative,\" Graham
emphasizes, \"because it brings together large institutions and small
groups. As the organizing \"node,\" we were able to involve people who
are usually excluded from this type of event.\" This weekend, the
collective of sound tinkerers AP and Kingdom of Piracy are organising
Plenum at Limehouse TownHall, a twelve-hour \"tour de force\" around
free software, the recurring theme of Node.London, also on the programme
of the Takeawayfestival, dedicated to \"Do-it-yourself media\", from 21
to 31 March. The festival closes on 1 April with Sum(1,4,6), a festive
evening including a cyber-fight between two legends of Net-art, Arcangel
vs. Subculture, who will face off by hacking a web page live.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1545

Adopted! The deputies voted solemnly yesterday on the highly contested
bill on copyright and related rights in the information society (DADVSI)
defended by the Minister of Culture, Renaud Donnedieu de Vabres. In the
two-thirds filled hemicycle, the text was adopted by 286 votes for, 193
against. The opposition deputies voted against, as did a majority of the
UDF. The UMP voted for but seven of its members including Christine
Boutin and Nicolas Dupont-Aignan voted against, and 14 abstained. The
socialists reiterated that they would refer the matter to the
Constitutional Council and did not fail to point out that the DADVSI had
been adopted by less than 50% of the 577 members of the Assembly. This
was the closest vote of the legislature that began in 2002. A nightmare.
While the text voted by the Assembly after some sixty hours of often
epic and passionate debates is heading to the Senate, where it will be
examined from the beginning of June, many voices have not waited for its
final adoption to say all the bad and/or good things that this
\"balance\" law inspires in them, according to RDDV. With the next
nightmare of the DADVSI in the background: the implementation of a text
that, by dint of trying to reconcile the most contradictory
requirements, has become totally ineffective. In the camp of the
cultural industries, of which RDDV has been the tireless defender by
promoting paid platforms for the distribution of cultural goods, the
first reactions are rather positive. After the resounding slap in the
face that was the temporary adoption of a global license paving the way
for the legalization of P2P exchanges, the vote on a system of sanctions
by fines that could be applied massively is a crucial point. \"This law
provides weapons that, if used, in particular by sanctioning each
downloaded file, explains Jérôme Roger, of the Upfi, the main
association of independent producers, will help to overcome the feeling
of impunity with regard to downloading.\" A drastic application of
sanctions that Gilles Bressand, of the Snep, the majors\' union, also
wants. \"This is not the big night of the end of downloading,\" he
emphasizes, \"but between the fines, the reinforced information for
Internet users and the development of legal offers, things should
improve.\" Satisfied with the legalization of the anti-copy protection
measures placed at the heart of the law, the producers fear on the other
hand that the cause of interoperability, which is primarily the
responsibility of technology providers, has been pushed a little too
far. \"Under the guise of achieving a balance between user comfort and
the necessary protection of works, we may have taken the risk of
weakening the status of DRM,\" continues Jérôme Roger, \"clarification
will be necessary in the Senate.\" The tone of voice is symmetrically
opposed among consumer associations. \"At best it will be inapplicable,
at worst it will lead to a clash between Internet users and the world of
culture,\" predicts Julien Dourgnon, of UFC-Que choisir, according to
whom this law \"will accentuate the migration towards encrypted and
anonymized P2P networks.\" After the advances obtained for free software
by the stricter supervision of DRM, the supporters of this open model
seem to hesitate between two attitudes. On one side, the refusal front,
camped by the FreeSoftware Foundation, opposed to any legalization of
software locks; on the other, the \"pragmatists\" of the Association of
Free Software Users (Aful), who, like their leader Bernard Lang, believe
that the text marks \"regressions\", such as the outlawing of P2P, but
also advances. \"The right to publish source code and the obligation to
make interoperability possible preserve the fate of free software,\" he
explains. \"And then all this is so vague, so applicable to anything,
that it can become a defense argument.\" Having become Ségolène Royal\'s
copyright advisor, Aziz Ridouan, 17, from the \"Audionautes\"
collective, still does not believe that the DADVSI can change anything
in the increasingly established practice of 10 million French people.
\"This law is a waste of time,\" he says, \"which reconciles no one. The
attention with which Internet users followed this debate is the only
real positive point, and it bodes very well for the presidential
election.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1546

Ten million French people, about one in four households, download
illegally from the Internet. If the National Assembly strictly followed
the contours of French society, a good hundred deputies would engage in
activities that the law condemns. Many of them assure us that this is
not the case, let\'s admit the omen. During the discussion on the
so-called \"DADVSI\" law (copyright and related rights in the
information society), Libération questioned some of the thirty most
assiduous deputies about their Internet practices during the debate,
which was also the first interactive debate in parliamentary history.
\"I don\'t download,\" says Laurent Hénart (37, UMP,
Meurthe-et-Moselle). Neither do his daughters, they are only 10 and 3
years old. \"I don\'t download and I don\'t have an MP3 player,\" says
Martine Billard (55, Green, Paris), who says she \"prefers to listen to
a CD in a comfortable armchair.\" \"I remain attached to the pleasure of
buying a physical medium, CD or DVD,\" adds Patrick Bloche (49, PS,
Paris), who is nevertheless a great critic of the government\'s project.
\"I don\'t have the time,\" says Alain Suguenot (54, UMP,
Saône-et-Loire), who admits that his children (18 and 21) \"have already
had to do it, like 80% of Internet users today.\" It\'s like the Bayrou
family: François (54, UDF, Pyrénées-Atlantiques) doesn\'t practice, but
his offspring\... \"I think so. With all the compilations they have, I
imagine they download.\" \"But they buy CDs, too,\" the UDF leader is
quick to point out. The oldest (21 and 23 years old) of the five
children of Dominique Richard (51 years old, UMP, Maine-et-Loire)
promised their father that once the law was passed they would go \"on
legal download offers\" and those of Richard Cazenave (30 and 25 years
old) are \"aware that copyright is respected\". Like their father.
\"Neither thugs nor delinquents\" On the other hand, at Christian
Paul\'s (45 years old, PS, Nièvre), \"we have legalized P2P in the
family circle\". Concretely? \"We go to the cinema, we buy DVDs (on
fnac.com\...), but between the release in theaters and the release of
the DVDs, my two daughters (13 and a half years old, and 10 and a half
years old) download The Inconnus and Harry Potter which they watch with
their little brother (6 and a half years old)\.... We are a family quite
emblematic of the cohabitation of models.\" As for Henri Emmanuelli (60
years old, PS, Landes), he claimed the record for the number of titles
downloaded on his MP3\... to the point of provoking emotion among those
around him: \"They\'re going to put him in prison for us!\...\" \"For
once, in the hemicycle, we were dealing with delinquency that affects
the children of MPs\", smiles the Green Martine Billard. All hands on
deck. Even in the ranks of the most resolute opponents of peer to peer,
the most ardent defenders of copyright, there are parents and
grandparents with tender hearts. This is demonstrated, for example, by
several interventions by the president of the UMP group, Bernard Accoyer
(60 years old, Haute-Savoie): \"No, our children or our grandchildren
who occasionally download a song or a piece from the Internet are
neither thugs nor delinquents who should be tracked down, apprehended
and punished.\" And he added: \"France is faced with enough delinquency
and violence for us not to make a mistake about our target or our
fight.\" But there is more to life than family. Blood ties can soften
the national representation, lobbies ensure that deputies do not forget
the interests of the cultural industry. The lobbies, therefore, were
omnipresent throughout the parliamentary debate, trying to take things
back in hand. In December, at the invitation of the Minister of Culture
and Communication, Fnac and Virgin held demonstrations of their
commercial platforms near the hemicycle. Leaflets in dubious taste
circulated on the Internet, such as this fake Top 10 called \"The
defeats of music (2006 awards)\", awarding, among other things, a
\"prize for female interpretation\" to Christine Boutin (62 years old,
UMP, Yvelines), because \"she only knows the chairs when it comes to
files\". The left attributed the unsigned pamphlet to Sacem (Society of
authors, composers and music publishers). For being the author of the
(defunct) global license, the socialist Patrick Bloche was threatened,
again on the Web, by the competing candidacy of a singer (Patrick Bruel)
in his constituency in 2007. Alain Suguenot, UMP rebel and opponent of
the government text, is convinced that the Rencontres cinématographiques
de Beaune, organized every year in October by the ARP (Civil Society of
Authors, Directors, Producers) in the city of which he is mayor, are
threatened with disappearance: \"It\'s almost done,\" he says. Unleashed
on the forums The discussion on the DADVSI bill is coming to an end and
Internet users, who understand that the die is cast, are unleashed on
the forums. Laurent Wauquiez, the youngest member of the National
Assembly, had gotten into the habit of coming to chat every evening of
debate on one of the most active, Framagora. That night, the resentment
boiled over. \"Come on, goodbye Mr. Wauquiez and good luck. Think about
your career change.\" March 17, 00:28, signed \"morgoth\". \"Now it\'s
time for me to go underground, since my country is taking on water,
forcing me into hiding and turning me into a criminal.\" March 17,
00:34, \"SixK\". Thousands of Internet users followed the long sessions
of the DADVCI debate live on the National Assembly website, with up to
17,000 simultaneous connections. They reacted in real time, with each
elected official finding in their office computer, at each of the
session interruptions, the batch of messages intended for them:
\"Wauquiez, on this amendment you are still off the mark! You shouldn\'t
have sub-amended, you should have voted against it!!!!\" (March 16,
23:59, Framagora, signed \"jahrynk\"). They tried to understand the art
of the amendment: \"How is it possible to vote for amendment 272 if
article 1 is rejected, since \[\...\] amendment 272 is attached to
article 1?\" (email addressed to Martine Billard). On their forums, they
echoed the best of the classiest formulas (like: \"Removing Internet
users\' freedoms is like trying to put a thong on a whale\", Henri
Emmanuelli). They discovered a political world that they did not know,
or knew badly. When Laurent Wauquiez registered on Framagora, they were
suspicious. The MP rebelled: \"What dismays me is to see the limits of
your openness and of electronic democracy among some people.\" \"Guys,
he\'s not wrong, for once an elected official comes to get his hands
dirty on a forum with direct access, we should try to welcome him a
little better\", replied \"drkarma\". On the other hand, the young MP\'s
efforts to explain the complexity of his work were in vain: \"It is
impossible for an MP to master technical subjects in all the details
\[\...\] You are right, it is one of the big prob \[sic\] of French
democracy, we pass laws that are too technical, but you have not missed
the fact that it is the government that proposes them and that the power
of Parliament is very limited,\" argued the elected official. \"So if
the subject is so technical there must be a way to deal with it
differently to allow experts to give their (enlightened) opinion and
thus allow legislators (who have become enlightened) to legislate,\"
replied, imperturbable, \"goldoraf.\" With the Internet, everyone can
see who is or is not in the chamber, and who says what. \"But we must
legislate for the general interest and not for a category of voters in
particular,\" worries Richard Cazenave, a user of free software. \"It\'s
not because I receive a dozen emails that all have the same meaning that
I\'m going to follow them,\" continues Dominique Richard, who is wary of
his colleagues \"who take up the arguments of Internet users and turn
the Assembly into a café.\" The voter and the Internet user The deputies
who support the Internet users\' cause have won critical acclaim. They
have even, sometimes, managed to change their correspondents\' view of
the political world: \"I wanted first to congratulate you on your
knowledge, which I must admit really surprised me for a politician, of
everything related to the Internet and IT in general\" (email to Patrick
Bloche). \"Despite the almost foregone conclusion, I am happy to see
deputies present who are working and getting involved. It\'s really nice
to see\" (an IT specialist from Aix-en-Provence to Patrick Bloche).
\"Mrs. Billard, I love listening to you \[\...\] and we, the Internet
users, can clearly see that you have mastered the subject. Mrs. Billard,
keep it up, you are a golden MP\" (message from Karim, 21 years old).
The voter is never far from the Internet user. The UMP is taking a
beating, others can hope to reap the benefits: \"I will remember this
during the upcoming elections\", writes a correspondent to François
Bayrou, a friend of Internet users and free software, to congratulate
him. \"I never thought I would one day support left-wing MPs, but the
action of the right in this affair has truly scandalized me and for the
first time my vote, however small it may be, will not be for them during
the next elections\", states \"Alexandre\" on Christian Paul\'s blog.
For the socialist Didier Mathus (53 years old, Saône-et-Loire), the
passion of the exchanges recalls the vigor of the discussions prior to
the referendum on the European Constitution: \"Internet users believe
that the powerful want to dictate their law to them. The project was
perceived as challenging the right to technological progress.\" In all
the texts that touch on freedoms and private life \"the relationship
with Big Brother\", says Richard Cazenave, civil society invites itself
into the debate and blurs the right-left divides. This one also mixed up
the bobos of Paris and the rural dwellers of Saône-et-Loire.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1547

On Friday morning, March 17, at 4 a.m., the deputies completed the
examination under emergency procedure of the twenty-nine articles of the
bill on copyright and related rights in the information society
(DAVDSI). For Renaud Donnedieu de Vabres, Minister of Culture and
Communication, the transposition into French law of the European
directive of 2001 was akin to a parliamentary nightmare. This very
complex text, largely revised since the first debates on Christmas Eve
2005, must still be approved by a solemn vote on Tuesday, March 21 in
the National Assembly before being examined in May in the Senate. What
will it change for Internet users, artists and the cultural industries?
Graduated and reduced sanctions for Internet users. The Minister of
Culture has considerably reduced the sanctions regime compared to the
first draft of his text and compared to current legislation. Illegal
downloads will no longer be punishable, as they are today, by three
years in prison and a fine of 300,000 euros. Three levels of sanctions
are provided for in the event of circumvention of technical protection
measures (TPM) against illegal downloading. Fraudulent Internet users
will risk a fine of 38 euros. A fine increased to 150 euros if they
share the illegally downloaded works. This is likely to be the case
often, since almost all piracy is carried out via peer-to-peer (P2P)
software, based on this principle of exchange. The scope of the
sanctions is still unclear. The minister simply specified that \"the
infringement reports will be carried out by P2P software that downloads
the address of the offending Internet user\". The offence will be noted
by a judicial police officer, and Mr Donnedieu de Vabres announced the
creation of \"specialized State services\", similar to those that fight
cybercrime. When will the fault be admitted? From the first offence?
These questions should be decided by decree and by the Council of State.
For the most serious cases, graduated sanctions complete the system. The
holder or user of MTP circumvention software is liable to a fine of 750
euros; a \"hacker\" who decrypts these MTPs risks a fine of 3,750 euros.
Providers of circumvention means are exposed to six months of
imprisonment and a fine of 30,000 euros. A severe crackdown on illegal
downloading software. Still in this logic of fighting piracy, it was
decided, via an amendment, to punish with three years of prison and
300,000 euros of fines the fact of publishing and making available to
the public \"knowingly\" software allowing the \"illegal downloading of
protected works or objects\". This provision, which makes the PS and the
Greens fear \"the death of free software\", does not however apply to
software intended for collaborative work or research. A college of
mediators to decide on the right to private copying. The number of
authorized private copies - made for one\'s own use from legally
acquired works - is ultimately not included in the law. A college of
mediators, composed of three members including two magistrates appointed
for six years, will settle disputes between rights holders and users,
and will establish the terms of exercise of private copying. A way of
following the recent case law of the Court of Cassation and not
excluding the possibility that these copies, at least for DVDs, may be
purely and simply prohibited. This new administrative authority will
have four months at most to rule on each case, and an appeal procedure
is planned. \"Interoperability\" between media is favored. In the
interests of transparency, sellers and publishers of protected products
will have to inform users of the possibilities of reading and copying.
Another advance in the text compared to its first version, the notion of
\"interoperability\", which allows an Internet user who has legally
downloaded a file to be able to read and copy it on all the media of
their choice, is included in the law. MTPs \"cannot hinder the free use
of the work within the limits of the rights provided for by the
intellectual property code and those granted by the rights holders\",
states the text of the law. To address suspicions of \"Internet
policing\", an amendment was adopted \"to prevent copyright management
from de facto compromising the security of individual users, businesses
and administrations\". The legal license abandoned. The most
controversial point, the legal license project, which deeply divided the
political parties, was however abandoned. Such a hypothesis, consisting
of legally downloading music in exchange for a monthly fee paid by
Internet users to artists, was widely opposed by the government, the
music and film industries, many artists and almost all authors\'
societies. However, it was supported by PS, PCF, Green and part of the
UMP deputies, two rights management societies for performing artists,
Adami, Spedidam and by UFC-Que choisir. In the same vein, another
proposal from the opposition, consisting of taxing Internet service
providers so that they finance culture, in the same way that television
must invest in cinema, was also rejected.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1548

If you want to publish your videos and create your own online TV
channel, you start by downloading Broadcast Machine. \"It\'s simpler
than most podcasting methods, and it\'s easier to install on your site
than most blogging tools,\" Holmes assures. Broadcast Machine, like
Democracy TV, integrates a P2P program called BitTorrent, which allows
you to distribute large video files to a large audience without the
broadcaster breaking the bank in bandwidth costs, each person who
receives the file shares the burden of distribution. The other star
software is Democracy Player, a video player available on Mac and since
February 24 also on Windows (Linux version in progress). \"Word of mouth
in the blogosphere is very strong, the Windows version was downloaded
100,000 times in one weekend,\" Holmes Wilson rejoices. When you launch
Democracy Player, you access a catalog of more than 340 channels. With a
single click, he can subscribe to the channels that interest him. Pick
from the videos offered or opt for automatic downloading each time a new
video is posted. To watch them in full screen, it\'s just as simple,
just sit back in your chair and press \"play\" without fear: Democracy
Player plays almost all formats: Windows Media Player, Quicktime, Flash,
Divx\... \"Unlike iTunes, which doesn\'t interpret most popular
formats,\" notes Holmes. \"Apple wants to force people to use its own
formats, while Democracy Player integrates the open source VLC player
(1), so it can interpret almost anything. This example also helps us
understand why it was so important for the software to be free; big
companies like Apple or Microsoft share the market to exclude the
others. But, with open source software, the code itself is in the hands
of the community. If we hope that software will help democratize media,
the software itself must be democratically controlled.\" The project was
developed with the help of developers from the United States, Canada,
India, and France. Luc Heinrich, a Parisian, developed the Mac version
of Democracy Player, enthusiastic about \"the social aspect of the
project, its activist side, its potential impact.\" (1) VLC is an open
source video player. A project initiated by students at the Ecole
Centrale de Paris, it has become a complete video streaming platform
supporting a wide range of formats and which works on all platforms.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1549

\"We were promised a minefield, and we got it.\" This joke from a
regular MP in the debates on DADVSI, the copyright law that is currently
stirring up the Assembly\'s nights, was illustrated again yesterday with
the vote on amendment 150, renamed \"Vivendi-Universal\" on P2P sites.
Supported by the majors, this highly controversial provision, including
within the majority, punishes with three years\' imprisonment and a fine
of 300,000 euros the act of \"knowingly\" making software available to
the public that allows the illegal downloading of \"protected works or
objects\". It is inspired by the ruling of the American Supreme Court
that outlawed Grokster, the P2P software. The opposition opposed this
measure in vain, which it believes will lead to the end of the
development of peer-to-peer sites in France. \"I am devastated, it is a
black day for free software\", declared the Green MP Martine Billard
while the socialist Patrick Bloche fears \"the expatriation of our
inventors\". It consecrates the abandonment of the principle of software
neutrality: only its illicit uses could be repressed by placing the
responsibility on Internet users. A real sword of Damocles for the
creators of these new means of exchange in full boom, to the extent that
the responsibility for the circulation of illegal P2P files on their
sites could be attributed to them. This drastic measure was then
softened by MPs from the majority, supporters of free software. They
tried to limit its impact by specifying that it does not apply \"to
software intended for collaborative work, research or the exchange of
files or objects not subject to copyright remuneration\". A correction
which did not prevent UMP member Bernard Carrayon, author of the
addition, from mentioning the "detestable VU amendment" on a forum.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1550

Dad\'s television is over (or almost). Télématin at 6:30, Le Pernaut at
1:00, soap opera at 2:00, cartoons at 4:00, the news at 8:00 and the
film at 8:30, domestic life has long revolved around the small screen
(now competed with by the Internet, video games and DVDs), punctuated by
its relentless programme schedule. A schedule that is in the process of
being shattered. \"The proliferation of channels, BitTorrent and
broadband are radically changing our habits\", analyses Rachel Baker, a
British net-artist in her project Unscheduled Television (1) which lists
projects by artists and activists around television culture. For her,
\"reality TV and football are the last bastions of these great
television masses, but,\" she specifies, \"if, at the office, we discuss
the latest Big Brother, home computers frantically download entire
series of Lost watched on the chain during the weekend.\" The
convergence of the Internet, television and cinema is disrupting
consumption habits and gradually erasing the division between
production, consumption and distribution. Anyone with a computer, a
digital camera and a good connection can today very simply make their
own videos, edit their images, and put them online on their website.
Video blogs (or vlogs) are increasingly popular, and their number is
growing, accelerated by the release of portable video players.
Audiovisual communication is now within everyone\'s reach, and some
already dream of creating new programs independent of the big TV
channels or cable networks. Commitment. TV by all and for all, that\'s
the goal of the Participatory Culture Foundation, a non-profit
organization that wants to make television on the Internet a new open
and independent mass medium. At the helm of this ambitious project, a
group of young activists based in Worcester, a city of 160,000
inhabitants an hour from Boston: Holmes Wilson, 26, Nicholas Reville,
26, Tiffiniy Cheng, 25, and Nick Nassar, 24. All have a history of
political engagement, supporting initiatives to fight sweatshops, or
participating in operations to provide free access to technology for
kids. They were especially talked about in 2004. Their collective,
Downhill Battle, led the campaign to defend Danger Mouse\'s Grey Album.
The DJ found himself at the heart of a storm for having mixed without
authorization The Black Album, by rapper Jay-Z, with the White Album by
the Beatles. What followed was a showdown between anticopyright
activists and the major record label EMI, culminating in Grey Tuesday, a
civil disobedience operation orchestrated by Downhill Battle, in which
170 sites participated, making the entire album available for free
download for twenty-four hours. Once the excitement had died down, the
free music activists focused their energy on a new major project: making
video publishing accessible to the general public. This was achieved
with the launch in February of Democracy, their Internet television
platform, open source and completely free to broadcast videos to tens of
thousands of people. The kit offers several software programs, one to
watch videos online (Democracy Player), another to share them (Video
Bomb), a third to create personalized channels (Broadcast Machine), and
finally a guide that lists more than 340 free channels to date. Child\'s
play. \"Television on the Internet will be a huge opportunity to
democratize the media. Anyone with a good connection will have the same
power that is jealously guarded by traditional broadcasters. Currently,
mass media is in the hands of a small number of large companies or the
government. This is especially true for the largest, most popular and
most influential of them: television. The only chance to make television
better is to make it compete with the productions of individuals, by
facilitating the distribution and viewing of videos online, believes
Holmes Wilson. A diffusion slowed down until now by tools too
complicated, too difficult to use by most Internet users. With this
platform, it becomes child\'s play (read opposite). \"As easy as turning
on a TV,\" judges Cory Doctorow of the very prescriptive blog
Boing-Boing. In the channel guide, you can find everything, animation,
news, indie video clips, sitcoms, documentaries, science shows, politics
\... arranged by genre or popularity. For now, English-language
productions make up the bulk of the channels available. Like Rocketboom,
one of the most popular vlogs on the Internet (130,000 downloads per
day), hosted by the bubbly blonde Amanda Congdon. A daily three-minute
clip that talks about current events and Internet culture, made with
zero budget, a camera, a computer, two lamps and a world map as a
backdrop. Co-director of the show, Andrew believes that the success of
the show is linked to the craze for \"personalized media. We don\'t all
wear the same clothes, why should we watch the same shows? These little
niche shows give us choice.\" Sitcoms, documentaries and game shows.
Those who are annoyed by Amanda\'s grimaces can fall back on TikiBar, an
alcoholic sitcom featuring characters whose main occupation is getting
drunk, which attracts 200,000 viewers every week, or treat themselves to
the Finnish feature film Star Wreck, a parody available on Death to
Hollywood which lists the best homemade films. Learn more with Nova, a
science show, or browse CurrentTV, Al Gore\'s participatory TV which
offers all sorts of unformatted documentaries and reports. Have a laugh
with It\'s Jerry Time, a great animated series evoking Lecointre-style
digital collages which tells the daily misfortunes of a likeable loser.
Or try your hand at burlesque with the game show This or That, hosted by
buxom pin-ups with feathers and suspenders. Americans prefer the French
maids of FrenchMaid TV (first to hit the channels) who teach with the
purest French accent, the sexy art of videopodcasting. Europeans gently
point out Zepberlin, a Berlin video art channel that emerged from the
web thanks to Videobomb.com (everyone can propose a video, Internet
users vote and propel the favorites to the head of the gondola).
Dialogue with the public. If the Democracy platform is a dream tool, the
content offered oscillates between the worst and the best, but the
important thing for the collective is that everyone can participate by
producing. \"The same thing happens on blogs, everyone can have one,
everyone can publish what they want and the most interesting material
comes to the surface.\" Unlike traditional television, which is a
one-way medium, Internet television favors dialogue with the public. As
traditional broadcasters migrate online, the foundation is more
interested in making sure that Internet television doesn\'t get taken
over by them. The activists are now working full-time on developing the
tools, with grants from Mitch Kapor and Andy Rappaport. \"Both are
entrepreneurs, Mitch Kapor is the illustrious founder of the Lotus
software company in the \'80s, he also supported Mozilla and Creative
Commons. They\'re both very political. They know that small pieces of
software can have a big impact on the way people work together and
communicate.\" (1) www.ambienttv.net/content/?q = unscheduledt

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1551

THE LAW on copyright in the digital economy will ultimately not mention
a minimum number of private copies. On Tuesday, March 14, on behalf of
the National Assembly\'s Law Commission, MP Christian Vanneste (UMP)
withdrew the only amendment that was supposed to allow a legally
acquired work (CD, video, etc.) to be copied at least once for private
use. This withdrawal, which spiced up the debates again on Wednesday, is
the consequence of a recent ruling by the Court of Cassation that
reiterated that private copying of DVDs is not an automatic right. \"You
are the Terminators of private copying!\" MP Christian Paul (PS) told
the Minister of Culture, Renaud Donnedieu de Vabres. It will be up to a
\"college of mediators\" to set the number of private copies possible
for each medium. This new administrative authority, a \"gas plant\" for
Martine Billard (Greens), who regretted that Parliament was thus
relinquishing its role as regulator, will be the \"34th\" created in
France, according to Didier Mathus (PS). Composed of two magistrates who
will choose the third mediator, this body will be able to be seized very
broadly by Internet users in the event of a dispute. Refusing to broaden
the debate to the long-term financing of culture, despite a shower of
amendments from the opposition, the minister did not consider taxing
Internet service providers. The most beautiful barbs were fired on
Wednesday evening on what is already called the \"Vivendi amendment\", a
sign of the influence of the lobbies. The fact of \"knowingly\" making
available to the public software allowing the downloading of \"protected
works or objects\" will be punished by a fine of 300,000 euros and three
years of imprisonment. \"The aim is to punish software publishers who
allow or facilitate the provision of protected files\" and \"not to make
peer-to-peer technology illegal,\" said Mr. Vanneste. \"This is a dark
day for free software,\" deplored Ms. Billard. Patrick Bloche (PS) once
again stressed the risks of unconstitutionality of this amendment. The
minister had difficulty persuading all the deputies that this new way of
monitoring and punishing was not aimed at Internet users but only at
\"those who want to circumvent copyright for commercial purposes.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1552

The global license is buried in the National Assembly, but the intense
battle between supporters and opponents of the legalization of
downloading is far from over. After three days of heated debates marked
by the government\'s rather confused conduct on its bill to adapt
copyright to the information society (DADVSI), the deputies were given a
break. The examination of the text will resume from Tuesday and the vote
on the entire text, initially scheduled for Wednesday, has been
postponed. \"We will hold out until Easter, or even Trinity,\" jokes the
socialist Christian Paul, who promises \"a few more great moments\" when
the deputies will address the regulation of private copying, the famous
DRM or technical protection measures, or the fine system developed by
RDDV (Renaud Donnedieu de Vabres) to punish Internet users still tempted
by downloading on P2P networks. Explosive subjects likely to put the
government in difficulty again. The parliamentarians will have to
resolve issues such as those related to interoperability (for example,
it is currently impossible to play music purchased on a site other than
Apple on an iPod). The debates also promise to be lively around the
access of free software to these new markets, which Microsoft or
Apple\'s protection systems risk making impossible. Accused of
satisfying the interests of the music industry lobbies by the left and a
handful of MPs from the majority, RDDV intends to provide proof of the
bright future that awaits \"legal\" platforms in a legal framework
\"secured\" by its law. This reasoning is the opposite of that of the
supporters of the global license, who are calling for participation by
Internet players in the financing of culture. The UMP rapporteur
Christian Vanneste has constantly called for a more \"personalist\"
conception of copyright, against the so-called \"collectivist\"
approach. \"Collective management of copyright has nothing to do with
collectivism,\" replied UMP MP Christine Boutin, who is pro-global
license.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1553

IN LESS than a year, the craze generated by the Google Earth site and,
to a lesser extent, by its main competitors, Microsoft\'s Windows Local
Live or NASA World Wind, has disoriented the small world of geography.
\"It\'s a revolution of the same magnitude as the one that occurred at
the beginning of the 20th century,\" analyzes Thierry Rousselin, spatial
imaging consultant for Géo 212. Fuel brands or automobile equipment
manufacturers, such as Michelin, had then launched into the production
of maps, which had nothing to do with their field of activity, to give
the first drivers a taste for travel. A first democratization had just
freed up cartography, until then mainly confined to the services of the
ministries of war. \"A hundred years later, sites whose job it is not,
and whose primary motivation is to place advertisements and business
addresses, are shaking up the geographic information systems reserved
for specialists. Everything that until now seemed extremely heavy and
complicated suddenly appears easy to all users, even beginners,\" says
Mr. Rousselin, who will organize the first French conference devoted to
these upheavals in Paris on May 17. For the time being, this revolution
is not yet due to the freshness of the images displayed on screens. To
cover its virtual globe with an initial mesh of views taken from space,
Google Earth used a fund of old photos taken by the first Landsat
satellites and made available free of charge to developing countries,
starting in 1999, by the American government. This substrate has since
been partially covered by other layers made up of \"recovered\" free
images, more or less recent and precise, which give its heterogeneous
appearance to the whole. \"CHILD\'S PLAY\" More recently, the site
reached an agreement with the operator of the private satellite Quick
Bird to use its photographic archives \"by weight\", i.e. at a low
price. \"Customers willing to pay, such as the oil industry or the
defense sector, need fresh images,\" says Mr. Rousselin. \"By buying
data that is barely more dated at a low price, Google Earth opens it up
to potential users who could not afford it, such as researchers,
environmentalists or development specialists.\" The change often mixes
technical advances with a mass user base. The general public was won
over by the simplicity of the interface and the fluidity of 3D
navigation. Since the end of June, when the free version of Google Earth
went online, millions of Internet users have tried to locate the roof of
their home. The site has further increased the familiarity of images
taken by satellites. Scientists, for their part, are beginning to
realize the uses they can make of its open-source philosophy and the
simplicity of its computer language. \"It has become child\'s play to
give a new spatial dimension to your research by aggregating your own
data with Google Earth images,\" explains Declan Butler, a reporter for
the journal Nature, who devoted a report to this subject on February 16.
\"For the moment, it is only a question of allowing you to visualize
your work on animal migrations or melting ice, but soon, new software
will allow data cross-referencing and geographic analysis.\" Frustrated
by the absence of a structured database, the journalist thus devoted a
site to the avian flu epizootic, where Internet users can follow the
global progression of the virus by browsing Google Earth
(http://declanbutler.info/blog). PUBLIC FREEDOMS It was also another
disaster that demonstrated the new power of the virtual globe. Two
months after it went online, the consequences of Hurricane Katrina could
be followed, almost in real time, on the site. The American government
had indeed authorized that aerial images of the New Orleans region,
taken daily, be consultable on Google Earth. Shortly after, this
consecration was however put into perspective by the blocking, for ten
days by the Pakistani authorities, of images of the earthquake that
ravaged the north of the country. Virtual freedom of movement on the
site remains restricted by the goodwill of those responsible for the
dissemination of the images. Questions about the jamming of sensitive
military bases, not only in the United States, continue to animate the
community of enthusiasts of the site. Similarly, debates have not failed
to arise on the risks of such a network for public freedoms. Sites using
Google Earth to designate the homes of sex offenders in the United
States highlight the devastating effect of the geographical \"staging\"
of public data. These debates do not prevent Google Earth from
establishing itself today as the obligatory reference for spatial
information. Even an institution as venerable as the National Geographic
Institute (IGN) has just made explicit reference to it, by announcing
the online publication of its aerial photographs on its future
\"geoportal\", which will open this summer. It will finally be possible
to zoom in on photographs with a resolution of 50 cm, covering the
entire national territory, including the French overseas territories.
The 3rd dimension, integrating relief, will have to wait until 2007.
Google and its competitors will have had time to capitalize on their
advance.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1554

The real societal debate opened by the parliamentary discussion on
copyright is all the more important since the Internet is
revolutionizing access to culture, particularly to the music and films
we love. The stakes are high because, if more than one in two French
people are Internet users today, in time we all will be. The digital era
creates an unstable balance between cultural industries and their
methods of production, distribution and consumption. This is the case
each time a new method of communication is established. What we must
seek and achieve is a new virtuous balance that preserves and stimulates
cultural creation and diversity. Two simple principles must guide the
action of public authorities to build the future. The first is that
copyright is a fundamental and intangible right. Heir to the
Enlightenment, it has been able to adapt to technological innovations,
such as the invention of the record and video. The second essential
principle is the freedom of Internet users. This is the freedom to
access works in the digital world. The challenge of the bill is to
reconcile these two principles through a series of concrete measures,
and this is the challenge that the text that I presented to the National
Assembly yesterday takes up. I have always listened to everyone. This is
why I wanted - in addition to the many new consultations since the
suspension of the parliamentary debate - to open a website
(lestelechargements.com) for dialogue between supporters of all possible
systems. The surprise adoption of an amendment to establish a global
license, the multiple positions taken and discussions, led me to propose
to the deputies a clearer, bolder text offering more guarantees. These
guarantees concern both Internet users and creators. And, among the
creators, the most fragile and the most independent. Contrary to certain
caricatures, what I defend is first and always the author and his work.
It is legitimate to maintain a high level of punishment for all those
who commit acts of counterfeiting and in particular those, individuals
or legal entities, who trade in them. But, for Internet users, risking
prison and a fine of 300,000 euros for an act of illegal downloading
makes little sense. It makes so little sense that it is simply not
applied. From now on, an Internet user who illegally downloads music or
a film from the Internet for their personal use will no longer risk
prison! They will incur proportionate and graduated fines. It is an
undisputed fact: illegal downloading of music and films threatens, in
the long term, musical and cinematographic creation. It is not the fact
that they are free of charge in itself that is at issue: an artist can
very well decide, if they wish, to make their works available for free
on the Internet. This can be an interesting way for young talents to
make themselves known. It is the illegality of making music and films
available that must be combated, otherwise all of French creation will
disappear and very quickly, because it will be suffocated. The global
license, whether optional or not, is not a solution for Internet users,
who would continue to be exposed to tracking and sanctions. A single
model that - by law - would be imposed on everyone, whether optional or
not, is not the highway that would lead to an ideal world, but a dead
end for French creation and cultural diversity. Some Internet users have
become accustomed to an unlimited offer. I hope that, for them, the
flat-rate model will develop. But not everyone has the same expectations
and everyone must find the offer that suits them on the Internet. I am
thinking in particular of \"streaming\", which in French should be
called \"listening online\", for example for a live concert; to online
rental, which allows you to download a film from home to watch it for 24
hours; to discovery offers, which will allow you to listen to an artist
for free for a certain period, or to have others listen to it. The bill
creates precisely the conditions for the multiplication of these
quality, secure, diversified offers, at reasonable prices and readable
on all media. This last point is major: the bill will guarantee
interoperability, which is a new freedom. If the technical measures for
the protection of works - often cited by their English acronym DRM
(Digital Rights Management) - are absolutely necessary for copyright to
be preserved, they must not prevent interoperability. In the same way,
technical protection measures must not prevent the copying, for oneself
and one\'s loved ones, of a legally acquired musical work. The bill will
therefore guarantee \"private copying\". To this end, it creates a
college of mediators, who will assess it according to the types of
media. DVDs must remain outside this provision for the time being.
Finally, while it is essential to give everyone the freedom to use the
medium of their choice, to choose free or proprietary software, it is
necessary to criminally sanction software publishers who are clearly
intended to make protected works available to the public, without
authorization to do so and who enrich themselves through this activity.
Why should employment, why should the remuneration due to work have a
different value depending on whether or not they are of an artistic
nature? This is, for me, the central issue, the societal issue, of this
text. It is also at the heart of the interprofessional negotiations
currently underway on employment and unemployment insurance for artists
and technicians in the film, live performance and audiovisual sectors.
It is at the heart of the cultural policy that I have been pursuing for
two years. Let us not be mistaken: the two debates are closely linked.
Finally, I would like to reiterate the obvious fact that nothing
prevents the free, unprotected circulation of works, if the author has
given his or her consent. The Internet can, and must, be a vector for
discovering new talent, as it is also a tool for innovative creation. Of
course, nothing prevents works that are free of copyright from being
made accessible. This is the purpose of the digital projects that I have
opened at the Ministry of Culture and Communication and of the European
digital library, launched by France, which will soon make our immense
literary and cultural heritage available on the networks. Copyright is
an essential conquest, freedom and emancipation factor for creators. The
\"DADVSI\" bill makes it possible to adapt it to the Internet era, while
respecting the freedoms and rights of each individual. The resumption of
discussion of this text is an opportunity for creation, for the
influence and attractiveness of France in the digital age. \* Minister
of Culture and Communication.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1555

THE GOVERNMENT played the element of surprise and caused a stir
yesterday on the benches of the National Assembly. Less than twenty-four
hours before the start of the session to examine the bill on copyright,
Renaud Donnedieu de Vabres, the Minister of Culture and Communication,
chose to withdraw Article I of this bill, which was considered
controversial. Indeed, it was during the discussion of this article that
the global license was voted on 23 December last, by a majority of the
deputies present. A measure that authorises the downloading of cultural
works on the Internet for a fixed fee. The seriousness was deemed such
that the discussion was urgently interrupted at the end of the year,
only to resume yesterday. For the government, the unilateral withdrawal
of this article and its replacement by an additional article on the eve
of the debate was the only way to avoid the risk of a feverish second
reading before the deputies, probably at a late hour of the night.
Jean-Louis Debré, President of the National Assembly, did not fail to
highlight yesterday evening the dangers of \"a second reading in a
virtually empty chamber\". The real beneficiaries of this first
manoeuvre will be the disabled, who will now benefit from an exception
to copyright, but also the press, which will be able to reproduce
without risk of infringement \"works in the public domain\". The
presentation, at the start of the session, of the text to replace
Article I did not prevent the submission, by socialist deputies in
particular, of sub-amendments calling once again for the establishment
of a global licence. During this first debate, Patrick Bloche, who spoke
on behalf of the PS, reiterated his attachment to the global licence
system, which \"cannot affect cinema\". He also denounced a system of
fines that \"paradoxically trivializes free services and nationalizes
copyright since the proceeds of fines will fall into the state budget\"
and not into the pockets of creators. For his part, François Bayrou, on
behalf of the UDF group, hammered home his desire to defend \"free
software\". Finally, Bernard Accoyer, president of the UMP group in the
National Assembly, paid tribute to the \"tremendous work of
consultation\" that took place throughout the months of January and
February. And he considered that the new proposed text now puts forward
\"a balanced and free solution\" with in particular a \"fairer scale of
sanctions\". A point of view that does not seem to be shared by all
deputies.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1556

After a two and a half month interruption, the examination of the highly
controversial bill on copyright resumed late in the afternoon at the
National Assembly in stormy conditions and the greatest confusion.
Before a packed chamber, the President of the Assembly, Jean-Louis
Debré, opened the debates in an atmosphere of parliamentary guerrilla
warfare after a real coup de théâtre by the government. In order to
avoid a new vote on the global license, which would have forced several
members of the majority to change their minds after rallying to this
solution in December, the government chose to purely and simply remove
the first article from the text. A provision authorized by the
regulations, but very rarely used during the examination of a bill. This
crucial article, partially voted on, opened the way to legalizing
downloading on the Internet for private use (against payment of a fee)
and completely unraveled the architecture of the bill developed by
Renaud Donnedieu de Vabres (RDDV). \"Counterfeit\". While the points of
order multiplied on the opposition benches, Jean-Marc Ayrault, the
president of the socialist group, denounced a \"snub to the national
representation\" and demanded the withdrawal of a \"counterfeit\" text
once again put on the agenda in an emergency procedure. The tone rose
again when Bernard Accoyer, leader of the UMP deputies, denounced the
\"double talk\" of the PS. Mocking, to the applause of his camp, the
absence in the hemicycle of the former Ministers of Culture Catherine
Tasca and Jack Lang opposed to the global license, he drew in return a
scathing reply from the leader of the socialist deputies along the lines
of \"the deputies of the majority bow down to the dictates of the
executive\". After this first round of fighting, the debate calmed down
when RDDV once again defended a text that he described as \"balance\"
between copyright and the 250,000 jobs that depend on it on the one hand
and Internet users\' access to culture on the other. Stating that the
monitoring of illegal exchanges is \"monitoring of works and not of
Internet users\", he sought to reassure the latter by adding that it was
not \"conceivable\" to risk prison for having downloaded a title for
personal use on P2P networks. On behalf of the UDF, François Bayrou
launched into a broad defense of free software, which he believes is
largely threatened by the legalization of DRM, these technical anti-copy
protection measures. However, he did not follow the socialist MP Patrick
Bloche in defending the principle of the global license. The latter
argued for the need to \"authorize and remunerate rather than prohibit
and sanction\" not without reiterating his demand for the withdrawal of
the entire text \"which has become incoherent\". \"Article after\".
After new skirmishes over the new first article proposed by the
government, which Henri Emmanuelli ironically described as \"an article
after the article that no longer exists\", the examination of the text
itself was able to begin. But the debates could last at least three
days.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1557

n Excerpts from the speech by the Minister of Culture and Communication
to the National Assembly: - \"This text provides a solid guarantee of
interoperability, to give everyone the freedom to use the medium of
their choice, to choose free or proprietary software\". - \"Preserving
the right to private copying is part of the new balance of the text\". -
\"A clear distinction must be made between the Internet user who
downloads a piece of music for their personal use, the people who
encourage illegal downloads of works and those who profit from works
illegally put online\". - \"It is inconceivable today that an Internet
user who illegally downloads a piece of music for their personal use
could risk going to prison. It is therefore necessary to graduate the
sanctions\". - \"Access providers must contribute to prevention by
widely transmitting electronic messages to their subscribers informing
them of the obvious dangers of piracy for artistic creation\".

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1558

On December 22, a few meters from the National Assembly and in the
middle of the TV cameras, it was at the Café Bourbon that the
\"resistance\" gathered, according to the expression of the head of the
Society of Dramatic Authors and Composers (SACD). Among others, we came
across directors Claude Zidi and Pierre Jolivet who castigated the vote,
the day before, by deputies from the right and the left, of the first
stage of the legalization of peer-to-peer exchanges for a monthly fee,
the famous \"global license\". A little earlier, the record industry,
mixing producers and artists, had protested at the same place.
\"Witchcraft trial\". These press conferences marked the beginning of
hostilities: for two and a half months, the global license received
truckloads of garbage dumped by record companies, the film industry and
some authors and artists. In the offices of the Ministry of Culture, in
the National Assembly, in the media and on the Internet, the same
message was hammered home: a \"creaticide\" project, \"demagogic\",
technically impractical and incapable of ensuring the financing of the
cultural sector. \"I didn\'t take it too well. The deputies voted
according to their conscience to find a system that reconciles the
remuneration of authors and the freedom of Internet users, and they were
put on trial by witchcraft\", says the leader of the UMP\'s global
pro-license, deputy Alain Suguenot. The \"celebrities\" were widely
mobilized to bury the license: from the end of December, the record
companies sent lists of prominent artists opposed to this mechanism to
the editorial offices, with quotes from Johnny Hallyday ready to use.
Then the politicians multiplied the meetings: we saw Goldman and
Calogero at Sarkozy\'s. Or Zazie and Julien Clerc with Dominique de
Villepin. The Alliance public-artistes, the collective bringing together
civil societies of performing artists (Adami and Spédidam) and consumer
associations (UFC-Que choisir, CLCV), at the origin of the global
license project, had a hard time making itself heard in this din. \"The
rise of the stars shocked me a lot. They are bound by contract with the
producers, and cannot say much else than they do\", explains Lionel
Thoumyre, spokesperson for the Alliance. The collective tried to respond
point by point to the \"caricatures\". No, the global license is not
\"all free\": a royalty of 5 to 7 euros per month on each Internet
subscription would raise several hundred million euros for creation.
Yes, it would be possible to redistribute this money to authors and
artists, etc. The Alliance also presented a petition from 13,500
performing artists in favor of the global license. But it lacks stars:
they are more likely to be musicians in the shadows, those who play
behind the stars and get little from record sales. Less sexy. Guerrilla.
A second lobbying front has opened up on the Internet. Because that is
where the agit-prop against the bill had been the fiercest. It is also
where the collective of activists for free software EUCD (named after
the directive transposed by the French text) has collected more than
150,000 signatures against the text. From blog to blog, sometimes
outrageous, sometimes very specific accusations are circulating against
the \"Dadvsi code\", the nickname given to the bill on copyright and
related rights in the information society. This guerrilla warfare is not
limited to a schoolboy mobilization: EUCD activists were listened to by
the UMP MP Bernard Carayon, for example. Internet collectives such as
the Audionautes (whose president, Aziz Ridouan, is 17) have been
received by the deputies. Gag. Renaud Donnedieu de Vabres says he
\"underestimated the information campaign, very effective if not
objective, conducted on the Internet\". On February 22, he launched a
\"debate\" site entrusted to Publicis so that Internet users and artists
could talk there (1). \"It is not a propaganda site\", he assured during
its inauguration, a party with punch at the Palais de Tokyo in Paris,
where Eddy Mitchell (who came \"to please \[my\] record company\"),
Alain Chamfort and Tété, but also global prolicences, showed up. The
very next day, the affair turned into a gag: mischievous Internet users
mocked this \"180,000 euro blog\", a sum spent by the Ministries of
Culture and Economy. But speech was free there: one only had to read the
dozens of messages that responded virulently to one of the first artist
videos put online, that of Marc Lavoine warning against the destruction
of \"300,000 jobs\". Since then, the site has been modestly reorganized
to spare guests from being torn to shreds by visitors. (1)
lestelechargements.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1559

The deputies who voted for the global license on December 21st actually
raised a problem that many wanted to hide: it is about much more than
the remuneration of authors, performers and producers of artistic works,
downloaded from the Web, until now completely illegally. As proof, the
heavy fines and sometimes even prison sentences that have been handed
down to Internet downloaders. We thought, as legislators, that it was
just a simple adaptation of the intellectual property code to new
technologies. Not at all! In fact, without really being aware of it, we
were shaking up colossal economic interests and placing the fundamental
principles of our Republic at the heart of the debate: individual and
creative freedom, respect for privacy, economic intelligence, even
national defense and thereby the sovereignty of the State! It was only
through the violence of the passions and pressures expressed following
the surprise adoption of the famous amendment in favour of the optional
global licence that we gradually saw the veil lifted on these enormous
issues. But let us leave aside today the major issues, which would
justify, by their magnitude, the creation of a parliamentary information
mission on the place of copyright, creation and people in the age of the
knowledge society. Let us stick here to simple copyright as such.
Astonishment in the ranks of the National Assembly! Artists with
established reputations who, believing themselves to be solidly
protected in the cultural industry by their publishing house, or their
major, suddenly start to use their dominant position to play the
defenders of their vested interests. To do this, they show themselves
ready to use arguments drawn from conceptions that date from another
era, that of before the Internet, that of the late 20th century. While
others, smaller, less known, less audible due to their weaker means of
pressure, and who are not themselves \"established\" or protected, turn
out to support the optional global license. In their burst of all-out
communication, the \"established\" in the cultural sector do not fear
using caricature, claiming that we would defend the total free nature of
works, which is false. Internet users would be \"thieves\" and the
redistribution of rights impossible. In fact, these pseudo-arguments are
fallacious and mendacious. Concerning the so-called free nature: the
optional global license is a remuneration! The optional global license
would amount to \"letting consumers help themselves for free in a
bakery\", like thieves? To take up this metaphor of works on the
Internet compared to the baker\'s bread, we must rather note that the
current position of the baker (publishing houses) consists of refusing
to sell his bread! Or rather, to force people to buy only a certain
pre-established choice of breads. More seriously: for artists, authors,
composers and producers, the global license consists of setting up, in a
very pragmatic way, fair remuneration through a distribution of the sums
collected, defined according to the audience of the works, itself
determined by the observation of flows and the organization of surveys
carried out among panels of voluntary Internet users. It would not
concern cinema. Since the debate did not really take place, the
positions became radicalized from the start, even poisoned, which would
justify the postponement of discussions to approach this bill with more
perspective and calm. However, if the debate takes place, the future of
the optional global license is already seriously compromised, due to
pressure of all kinds. In the National Assembly, like Mr. Seguin\'s goat
caught in a trap, we will fight all night. In order to affirm that
behind these exchanges relating to copyright, it is much more our model
of society that is at stake. As the specialist in new technologies Joël
de Rosnay explains, we must move from the era of mass media to that of
mass media. We are probably in the process of changing paradigms. It is
about defining a digital cultural policy in which the relationship of
the French to culture would be based not on constraint but on the
plurality of the offer, voluntary adhesion and the recognition of
talents. The question is to know with what perspective we envisage this
change: with the glasses of yesterday, those of material supports, or
those of tomorrow, of the immaterial? Fortunately, the Economic and
Social Council, Spedidam and Adami, UFC-Que choisir, Unaf, Professor
Lucas, audionauts, the entire galaxy of free software and many others
have already put on the glasses of tomorrow. Do we want to build a
society of freedom, diversity and our ever-rebellious and prophetic
French identity or, on the contrary, one of inquisition and confinement?
For our part, we choose freedom and responsibility. Christine BOUTIN, MP
(UMP) for Yvelines, President of the Forum of Social Republicans

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1560

Having been pushed into the background during the first reading of the
copyright law in the National Assembly, the highly controversial DRM
(technical protection measures) should this time be at the heart of the
debates. These technological \"locks\" have a dual objective. To curb
the possibility of copies, which is almost infinite, by organizing the
management of digital rights. And to facilitate for a few large groups
dominating these markets an efficient and lucrative distribution of
their content on the networks. This technological framework is not
without risks. First, it could considerably complicate the maintenance
of the private copy exception, the right to copy a work for personal
use. The management of this right will, according to the bill, be
entrusted to a \"college of mediators\". In addition, the legalization
of these DRM by law has so far had as its main effect the multiplication
of standards and formats, which is particularly harmful to the consumer.
Fines. A central point of the law, these systems of control and
opening/closing of digital rights will be recognized and legally
protected. Circumvention will be prohibited and punished. Using software
designed to bypass a DRM, as is widely available on the Internet, will
cost a fine of 750 euros. An Internet user who proceeds to neutralize a
DRM system himself, thus revealing a motivation that is undoubtedly
greater than that of a simple user of a prohibited program, will be
fined 3,750 euros. It is the provision of anti-DRM software to allow its
distribution on networks that will be the most severely punished, with
sentences of up to six months in prison, accompanied by fines of 30,000
euros for what will be treated as counterfeiting. Far from being limited
to the role of anti-copy devices protecting copyright, DRM can be used
to lock consumers into captive paid download systems. Opponents of the
law have pointed out the paradox of legalizing DRM without first
imposing on manufacturers the \"interoperability\" (i.e. compatibility)
of their technical devices. The DRM promoted by Apple, which today holds
80% of the legal download market with its iTunes Music store, prevents,
for example, playing a track purchased from its online store on a
portable music player other than an iPod. Sony, and to a lesser extent
Microsoft, are doing the same thing. And the players in free software
are excluded from this new market. Exception. Powerless to impose
interoperability on manufacturers with global strategies, the government
promises to \"guarantee\" it by mentioning it in black and white in its
law. It will not sanction Internet users who circumvent them for the
sole purpose of implementing interoperability. Those who remove Apple\'s
DRM not to copy the latest Madonna, but to be able to listen to it on
their digital portable music player of another brand would therefore not
be sanctioned. A real headache.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1561

This is the last chance vote. Tonight, Renaud Donnedieu de Vabres, the
Minister of Culture and Communication, will present his text on
copyright reform in the digital age to the National Assembly. In
December, the Prime Minister himself decided to artificially suspend the
discussion in order to calm the parliamentary storm. Indeed, on
Christmas Eve, MPs from all parties adopted an amendment establishing
the global license. That is to say, the possibility of downloading
sounds and images at will on the Internet without this practice giving
rise to real remuneration. One way of legalizing piracy. Yesterday, the
French government decided to withdraw the first article of the bill on
copyright, which should be completely rewritten. In addition, the rue de
Valois amended its text and attempted a little education with a very
divided national representation. The new text, which provides for
relaxations compared to the first version, also gives assurances. The
private copying exception is strengthened and sanctions in the form of
simple fines are preferred to the graduated response system which could
lead to prison sentences. Finally, the government has declared itself in
favour of \"interoperability\", in other words the possibility, in
certain cases, of being able to read works regardless of the
distribution platforms. Twenty or so amendments presented Will these
advances be enough to convince the deputies? Nothing is less certain.
One first unknown remains, the position of the UDF. No one knows whether
the parliamentary group will follow François Bayrou, a supporter of free
software and total interoperability, or rather Pierre-Christophe Baguet
and Jean Dionis, more measured in their amendments. The Greens, like the
communists, who initially would have preferred a postponement of the
discussion, would support the global license. In this, they follow the
socialist group, led by deputies such as Christian Paul, Didier Mathus
and Patrick Bloche, all in favour of free access. A position that they
defended despite the opposition of François Hollande and Anne Hidalgo,
head of culture on rue Solferino. Like some of the dissident UMP
deputies, they should present around twenty amendments freely inspired
by Adami and Spedidam, two authors\' societies that defend the global
license. In addition to the latter, they recommend taxing access
providers and advocate the broadest possible interoperability. The
success of Renaud Donnedieu de Vabres therefore depends on the ability
or not of the UMP to vote as one and follow the instructions of the
government and Nicolas Sarkozy. But nothing is less certain. On a trip
to the Antilles, the head of the UMP and his lieutenants will not be
there to enforce parliamentary discipline, at the height of the
discussion. Moreover, personalities like Alain Suguenot, Bernard Carayon
or Christine Boutin could end up convincing the thirty or so undecided
deputies who are not exactly won over by the text\'s complications.
Especially since the very influential National Union of Family
Associations, the counterpart of UFC-Que Choisir, has reportedly come
out in favour of free education.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1562

After an initial series of debates in December, the bill on copyright is
now back before the National Assembly. There is no point hiding it, the
previous discussions were moments of great tension, not to mention doubt
and confusion. Each of the three of us was in the chamber at the time
and we took part in this debate with our respective sensitivities. The
deputies hesitated between a global license and copyright. The version
that was then proposed to us had the advantage of highlighting the
protection of copyright, but it passed over a reality a little too
quickly: the Internet has been a space of boundless freedom and without
rules for at least ten years. A whole generation of Internet users has
adopted habits of free access, exchanges and unlimited access to all
data. Returning to this balance can only be done by taking into account
all the parties concerned: creators, Internet users, independent
creation\... We must succeed in reconciling this freedom, which is the
strength of the Internet, with the necessary protection of artists\'
rights. The project, whatever its many positive aspects, could have been
flawed by a form of imbalance and the center of gravity seemed too far
removed from the habits adopted by Internet users. A hemicycle is a
capricious beast. Even without all being keen on downloading or
peer-to-peer, we preferred, after the vote on the amendment on the
global license, to put the work back on the table. It is often said that
the National Assembly is too submissive. This time, that was not the
case. Since then, we have all taken up the bill to remodel it. At the
UMP level, Nicolas Sarkozy, whose intervention was decisive in bringing
back a little serenity, brought together the world of artists in its
diversity to better make their expectations heard. Within the
government, Renaud Donnedieu de Vabres carried out the necessary
clarifications of the text, to better reconcile the freedoms of Internet
users with respect for the work and remuneration of our creators. In the
Assembly, the working sessions on the parliamentary amendments
alternated with meetings with artists. This is the state of mind with
which we will approach the debate that will open again on March 7. First
of all, the question of artistic creation is primary. This involves the
protection of copyright and its fair remuneration. This is not a purely
accounting approach or a reduction of music or a film to a supermarket
product protected by a patent like any other. But a more fundamental
evidence: creation involves the protection of the work, by its
valorization in what is unique about it, and it alone guarantees
cultural diversity and the emergence of young authors. This position
excludes the global license which is based on this slightly crazy idea
according to which, with a flat rate of 10 euros, you would have access
to all products as in a magic supermarket. This would be the death of
creation and its leveling down. It is not about the checkbook of great
artists but quite simply about the balance of a creative system which,
without it, would no longer even have the audacity to give new talents a
chance. The Internet is a formidable tool for dissemination and cultural
openness. We must start from this strength. But at the same time it must
be tamed, otherwise the Janus can take on another face and become a
terrible threat to artistic creation. This is the balance we must find.
Once the protection of creation has been guaranteed, it remains to open
up spaces for Internet users. First, the right to private copying. We
say the right, and not the exception of private copying. Because the
acquisition of a work, especially musical, must be accompanied by the
recognized right to use it freely within the family circle. The tendency
to limit or even exclude all private copying must be clearly rejected,
because it would take us back to restrictions even before the time of
the BASF cassette. Downloading and then copying a CD onto your computer,
laptop and MP3 player must remain open and free practices. This is a
fundamental point for us. This right will most likely extend to five
copies, even if it will be up to a college of mediators to set it. With
regard to DVDs, the right to private copying would nevertheless assume
that all guarantees for its real and optimal protection are ensured.
Secondly, interoperability. To put it simply, it is about preventing
Windows or Mac from locking the use of files for the sole benefit of
their software through DRM (digital rights management). In other words,
we must keep the space for free software. This is an economic priority
for France where the free software industry is important while we are
sorely lacking a Gallic Windows, economic patriotism obliges. We must
therefore avoid any form of latent trust; in IT, big brother is never
far away. But it is also a guarantee in terms of cultural diversity.
Third, refuse the implementation of arbitrary surveillance of the
Internet. In its first version, the bill spoke of a graduated response
and focused repression in particular on the Internet user. The
minister\'s concern was to get out of the current legal confusion, which
could lead directly to prison, handcuffs on the hands, an Internet user
downloading excessively. We could share this concern. However, the risk,
by focusing the action on the Internet user, was to have an ineffective
system and to lead to an opposition between the Internet community and
the community of artists. The initial version of the bill did not
sufficiently mark the difference in treatment between the Internet user
and the organizers of the fraud. The new version proposed by the
minister changes philosophy and we must applaud his work on this point.
Instead of tracking down the individual Internet user, we will turn to
the fight against illegal download sites and the Internet users who
organize it. This is both more effective and less liberticidal. These
different points, compared to other European countries and even to the
United States, represent an undeniable step forward: protection of
artists\' rights, guarantee of the right to private copying, defense of
free software and fight against piracy centered on software rather than
tracking the Internet user\... these are points that France would be the
first to protect. No country in Europe has put it forward so far. As if
even the transposition of a European directive leaves a significant
space for creativity. Finally, we must have the lucidity to tell
ourselves that once the law is written, it is only the beginning of a
story. The most important thing remains to be done. On the one hand, we
will have to implement download platforms. If content providers do not
play the game, all this will have been useless. The announcements of the
implementation of the first download site in the field of cinema are
excellent news. Similarly, the signing of an agreement recently
negotiated by Renaud Donnedieu de Vabres between content providers and
the National Education system is a step in the right direction. On the
other hand, we will have to ensure the diversity of content. If it is to
impose American blockbusters on us endlessly, we will have lost
everything. But from this point of view, through its richness and ease,
the Internet is rather an opportunity for cultural diversity. The
Internet represents a cultural revolution of a magnitude that takes us
back to the time of the first tentative steps in printing. It is not
abnormal that we, as legislators, approach this subject with a minimum
of caution. The challenge is considerable: to domesticate its
extraordinary contributions in terms of cultural diffusion without this
leading to a drying up of artistic creation. The doubt of the legislator
sometimes has its good side. After the confusion of the first leg, it is
time for the second leg. Françoise de Panafieu, MP, national secretary
for cultural issues at the UMP, Dominique Richard, UMP MP, spokesperson
on the bill and Laurent Wauquiez, UMP MP.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1563

Radiant complexion, not a hair out of place, not an ugly dark circle
betraying a drunken evening, a curvy back that would make one pale,
golden thighs without cellulite, a neckline without creases, a sort of
perfect body, almost supernatural. An unbearable observation when
turning the glossy pages of fashion magazines, fortunately
counterbalanced by this intimate conviction that all the photos have
been largely retouched by skilled manipulators of digital images.
However, it is difficult to prove: these retouching artists, like good
plastic surgeons, leave no trace of their scalpel strokes, of the
additions and erasures made to make bodies more seductive. Thanks to a
project developed by Evan Roth, a member of the Openlab research
department of the New York digital creation center Eyebeam, these
invisible manipulations come back to haunt perfect images. \"The Art of
detouch\" allows the user to explore very precisely the way in which
these images have been modified. The application, which uses Processing,
an open-source programming language, allows you to compare images before
and after retouching, pixel by pixel. A bra strap that pops, a thong
that gets shorter, a swollen chest, whitening teeth, added curls, fuller
lips, a raised look, a shaved face, a smoothed thigh. If these
modifications can escape the naked eye, the Detouch program allows you
to immediately see the places where the manipulations are concentrated
(buttocks and breasts, but not only). A project that casts a critical
eye on the representation of the female body. \"I had a lot of trouble
finding photos of retouched men,\" admits the author of the project (1)
in an interview with a New York radio station. (1) http://www.blog.
ni9e.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1564

A new player in the music app market is openly trying to shake up iTunes
by combining the functions of a music player with those of a web browser
to \"play the web.\" It\'s called Songbird, and its developer, Pioneers
of the Inevitable, of San Francisco, built it using Mozilla\'s engine,
the father of Firefox, and its open-source philosophy. The application
is still in its infancy---version 0.1 is not even beta, but proof of
concept!---and several features are missing. For example, Songbird
can\'t read CDs yet---that\'s strange---and it doesn\'t seem to
recognize the tags on all your mp3 files, including Apple\'s m4a files.
Its main asset is that it channels the ways of listening to music on the
Web into a single tool: streaming radio, podcasts, downloading files
from paid sites, mp3 blogs, etc. The application has received mixed
reviews (wouldn\'t a Firefox extension have done the same job?), but its
development is being closely monitored. www.songbirdnest.com Cheney\'s
Got a Gun! You knew it was coming: some comics were quick to seize on
the story of the American vice president unloading his shotgun in the
face of his 78-year-old millionaire lawyer friend to create a parody
that quickly spread across the Web. The Bob Rivers Show, Seattle\'s
equivalent of the Yé trop d\'bonne heure radio show, offers their
version of Aerosmith\'s hit Janie\'s Got a Gun, renamed Cheney\'s Got a
Gun, a short two-minute parody for your viewing pleasure.
www.bobrivers.com Seventies Gold Mine Famous American concert producer
and promoter Bill Graham has put a captivating radio show online on his
website, Wolfgangsvault.com. Wolfgang? That\'s the real first name of
this Berlin native who fled the Nazi regime to settle with his family in
the Bronx. The rest is rock history, and for the first time, his
impressive archive is available for free to fans of good old rock. The
owner of the legendary Fillmore Auditorium in Denver, Colorado, hosted
the biggest names of the era, recording their performances for
posterity. Once on the site, click on Vault Radio and enjoy. When I last
visited, a live version of Dock of the Bay was playing, performed by
Booker T. & The MG\'s and recorded at Winterland in 1968. Santana
(Persuasion, at Filmore West, 1968), Frank Zappa & The Mothers (Peaches
En Reglia, Fillmore East, 1971) and a jam session with Taj Mahal, Elvin
Bishop and Boz Scaggs had just been broadcast. www.wolfgangsvault.com
Random\... Montreal netlabel Archipel, run by Pheek, has been offering
its 15th release for a few days, the mini-album Cycling Through Red
Light EP, by Scandinavian duo Kabale und Liebe. Four tracks of bubbling
minimal techno that Richie Hawtin (Plastikman) would have already
adopted\... and all for free, according to the philosophy of the virtual
label. www.archipel.cc The online store Amazon.com is reportedly about
to launch its own online mp3 store to take on the market dominated by
Apple/iTunes. Amazon, which is currently negotiating with record labels
to give birth to a monthly sales and subscription service, has also
reportedly sounded out Samsung, which is reportedly making its own mp3
players with the Amazon logo. Leaked on the Web: about half the songs
from The Flaming Lips\' new album, At War With the Mystics\... Three
songs from Calexico\'s new album, Garden Ruin\... In the nightmare
category: an excerpt from the first albums of Kevin Federline (Popozao)
and Nicole Richie (Dandelion).

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1565

Director of the Libreville digital campus, Richard Aubry has been a
member of the Agence universitaire de la francophonie (AUF) since 1993.
He lived for several years in Côte d\'Ivoire, Senegal and Gabon. What is
the objective of these French-speaking digital campuses? They are
technological support points installed within 43 French-speaking
universities, more than half of which are in Africa. These campuses,
co-managed by the AUF and the host university, aim to develop the use of
information and communication technologies in universities in the South
and to facilitate access to them for students, teachers and researchers
in these regions. The objective is to integrate the Internet and new
technologies into their work habits but also to promote the circulation
of knowledge in the French-speaking university space. We want to offer
academics from the least technologically advanced regions the
opportunity to be connected to universities in the North and to exchange
their expertise. What is your assessment of the different functions of
the digital campus? It depends on the regions of the world, but in
Africa, our first objective of increasing the number of Internet users
is achieved everywhere. Distance learning or on-site training on
campuses is booming. We started small but we intend to strongly develop
this aspect of our program. However, we regret that the production and
dissemination of knowledge by researchers in the South is currently
lagging behind. What types of university production could be encouraged
by new technologies? We offer the possibility of creating online
journals, by providing subsidies and training. For the moment, in
Libreville only one journal, on African philosophy
(http://exchoresis.refer.ga), has seen the light of day. The creation of
institutional or scientific sites for the university is not very
successful either: only one site is online, bringing together texts,
sound and visual elements on traditional music from Central Africa
(www.musiques-traditionnelles.ga). We also offer professors the
opportunity to put their courses online, without much response for the
moment. The same assessment is true for research: apart from doctors,
few researchers or PhD students are interested in the databases that we
offer. We need to strengthen the promotion of these programs. Are
digital campuses also a response from the French-speaking world against
the Anglo-Saxon world? Another ambition of the AUF and digital campuses
is indeed to compete with the American technological dream and to show
that Europe can do the same thing, in French if possible! For example,
we promote the French online publishing software Spip. But the financial
aspect is also very important: there is the digital divide but also the
digital bill! Software and other programs sold commercially are
expensive, especially for African countries. We promote free software,
accessible to all on the Internet, such as Linux. Our computers are
configured under Linux in the campus spaces. But we have put Windows
back in the university\'s cyberspaces because the students asked for it,
there were compatibility problems. Our fight for free software is not
yet won!

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1566

www.platoniq.net/burnstation www.clubtransmediale.de Berlin special
envoy It looks like a mutant Jamaican sound system, even if the powerful
speakers spit out electronica or breakcore rather than dance-hall.
However, that is not the main attraction of this high-tech mobile
discotheque imagined by the Barcelona collective Platoniq. Burn Station
is a nomadic station that allows you to freely copy music and burn it
free of charge onto a CD. This project, which has just been awarded a
prize by the Transmediale, a Berlin digital art and culture festival,
does not, however, promote piracy unbridled: Burn Station only offers
legal content made available by netlabels. \"We were looking for a way
to give visibility to these label productions that only exist online,\"
explains Olivier, documentary filmmaker and founding member of Platoniq.
\"To find a distribution system that would be a sort of mobile
self-service.\" The project began in 2003, when Platoniq invited
webradios and netlabels to participate in events, during which they made
tracks from their catalog available to the public. \"People could come
and burn CD-Rs, at first, it was artisanal, long and laborious, we said
to ourselves that we should develop software to make it easier.\" The
Burn Station was born, a non-commercial project entirely developed in
open source that \"brings the culture of the Net to the streets.\"
\"Culture of the free.\" The copy station embedded in a van invests the
parking lots, streets, bus stations, toilets, the metro, bars,
galleries, in Graz, São Paulo, Madrid, Bogotá, Mexico, Zurich, Halle or
Berlin, establishing a bridge between the Internet and physical places.
\"In the street, we find all sorts of people, children, grandpas, who
are not necessarily aware and who come to see us, ask questions,
explains Susana, a bubbly developer. It\'s much more interesting than in
media art festivals. It allows us to spread the culture of free software
and to raise awareness among a public of non-experts.\" Before being
published on the Net, the software was also tested in the street, later
developments were made at the request of users who wanted, for example,
to be able to forward the files to their friends. \"We organize commando
operations, wild posters to warn people that the station will be at such
and such a place at such and such a time, we plug in the generator and
off we go.\" The cops have indeed turned up sometimes, eyeing the CD
burners suspiciously. \"But we don\'t need to run away like street
vendors, everything is legal and free, you just have to explain to the
police that it\'s copyleft music. That\'s maybe the hardest part,\"
laughs Olivier. Personalized compilation. At the Transmediale, the Burn
Station was on fire all weekend. With headphones screwed on their ears,
visitors to the Academy of Arts, equipped with blank CD-Rs, spent hours
manipulating the joystick to navigate through the directories of
netlabels (about twenty to date, mainly Latin American and European and
almost exclusively electronic), listening to the tracks, reading the
related information, selecting their favorites from a playlist and
finally burning their personalized compilation. \"Burn Station is both
open source software, a database of copyright-free music and also a
social event where people come to share their files,\" summarizes
Olivier. Which is summed up in their slogan \"From peer-to-peer to face
to face.\" Each appearance of the Burn Station is accompanied by
performances, DJ mixes like last Tuesday at the Club Maria am
Ostbahnhof, where Platoniq had set up its \"burning camp\" and invited
the Barcelona netlabels Alku (read below) and Racapapu, or Jahtari from
Leipzig. \"In each city, we try to stay a few weeks to meet the local
scene, discover the producers, involve them in our project\", says
Susana. A group of cultural producers, curators and software developers,
Platoniq combines technological expertise and social commitment. Not
very fond of institutions, they prefer to spread their philosophy of
free software and the gift economy on the street, working as closely as
possible to people\'s needs during workshops and cultural events that
are often self-financed. After its Berlin stop, the Burn Station is back
on the road and setting up in Malaga, in the south of Spain, from March
9 to 12. photos thomas meyer. ostkreuz

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1567

It is not really a time for laughter, as the scandal caused by the
publication in the Danish press of the caricatures of Mohammed seems to
indicate, revealing the degree of tolerance of our contemporary
societies. In this world strongly shaped by technologies where the
mechanical laughter of the small screen resonates, humor is the tactic
adopted by certain artists to provoke disruptions and salutary
dysfunctions. They are the subject of \"Smile Machines\", an exhibition
at the Academy of Arts in Berlin organized as part of the Transmediale
festival. The international high mass, in the midst of an identity
crisis, is attempting to emerge from its \"media art\" festival ghetto
to address digital culture more broadly. \"Smile Machines\" bears
witness to this attempt to place digital arts in a historical
continuity. From Fluxus to the Yes Men, from Filliou to Jodi, it
examines the relationships between art, humor and technology. \"Smile
Machines\" is not an exhibition about humor, but a common spirit runs
through it, an attitude of disrespect, of provocation, mainly in the
guise of derision and irony,\" explains its curator Anne-Marie Duguet,
professor at Paris-I. Indeed, the Smile Machine by Fluxus artist Georges
Maciunas, a small torture instrument dating from 1971 that is placed in
the mouth, does not dilate the spleen but spreads the lips to constantly
keep the smile. A hideous smile that looks more like a grimace.
Disrespect. This training of the smile by the machine can be found in
the installation Cheese by Christian Möller, women filmed at length who,
as soon as their smile fades or becomes disconnected from the rest of
the face, are called to order by an emotion detection system. The
overplayed smile, or \"oversmilling\", as a sales argument, as a driving
force of the market economy. \"Smile machines\" is partly a metaphor for
this forced hedonism and the mutation of behaviors shaped by the
consumerist model,\" explains the curator. The two useless robots Petit
Mal by Simon Penny and The helpless Robot by Norman T. White sound like
insults to a society dominated by the ideology of performance and
efficiency. The first, endowed with sophisticated artificial
intelligence, put to the service of nothing, sometimes comes to rub
against the visitor like a young animal, the second enslaves man to his
whims and insults him when necessary. \"The objective today is to
eliminate all errors,\" observed Norman T. White at the Mystakology
conference, \"we want to control everything, and we thus protect
ourselves from any surprise, we should relearn to appreciate this lack
of control.\" They are adepts of chaos and computer accidents, favoring
these moments of rupture that reveal the ideology inscribed in
technology. The Dutch duo Jodi accumulates software malfunctions to the
point of absurdity, such as the very popular video game Max Payne. A
mockery of technology itself, which can be found in the self-proclaimed
\"techno-idiot\" Nam June Paik, recently deceased, who has devoted his
entire life to desacralizing it. The same disrespectful attitude of
Agnès Meyer-Brandis, who mocks the myth of space conquest and scientific
experimentation, by demonstrating the existence of underground icebergs.
In a tent set up outside, the frozen visitor could slide a camera
attached to a wire into a bottomless hole dug in the ground, and observe
on a screen the \"re-enchanted\" world that was hidden beneath his feet.
Interferences. The \"jokes\" of the Yes Men have something tragically
funny. In April 2004, these aces of media imposture infiltrated an
international conference of bankers in London, where they had been
accidentally invited through their site dowethics.com, a parody of that
of Dow Chemical, to whom we owe Agent Orange and the Bhopal disaster.
Posing as representatives of the multinational, they presented a
revolutionary technique for optimizing financial risks for companies
whose activities are likely to cause significant human losses and other
ecological disasters. This calculator makes it possible to evaluate the
acceptable number of deaths, in relation to the company\'s profits. An
outrageous, unvarnished liberal speech that the bankers applauded
enthusiastically before posing for a photo with the mascot: a golden
skeleton. By pushing capitalist logorrhea to the point of absurdity, the
Yes Men set out to correct identities and show the perversions of
globalization. With its bitter laughter and black humor, \"Smile
Machines\" invites us to look at the world with the critical shift
advocated by Filliou: \"Whatever you think, think something else,
whatever you do, do something else.\" Internet activists have made humor
their main weapon, not to detach themselves from reality but to seize it
head-on; hence the theme of the festival this year, \"Reality Addicts,\"
explored in numerous conferences, screenings, and installations. In this
hyper-mediatized world of screens, mp3 players, and surveillance
cameras, these committed artists try to create disruptions, to provoke
interference. Inconsistencies. Like Human Browser, a Wi-Fi performance
by Internet artist Christophe Bruno, who sows confusion in the crowded
corridors of the Academy of Arts. A pretty blonde wearing headphones
tries to engage in dialogue with bewildered visitors, a stream of
incoherent words punctuated by insults. Her words do not belong to her,
they are dictated to her by a synthesized voice that reads snippets of
text from the Internet in real time. The young Barcelona collective
Platoniq shares the same desire to bring the Internet to the streets
with the Burn Station project, a mobile CD burning station, installed
during commando operations in bus and train stations, in the street.
People can come and listen to music from labels that exist exclusively
on the Internet, make their playlist and leave with a CD. It is also a
way to promote free culture (open source software, copyleft licenses) to
the general public. The main attraction of this very popular edition
remains the granddad of \"happy music\" and \"crazy loops\", the
ineffable Jean-Jacques Perrey, 77 years old, who came to tell his
incredible life as a pioneer of electronic music in a stormed
amphitheater. Same rush at Club Maria, Monday evening, where the hammy
ondioline player, supported by Dana Countryman, performed his flashy
electro-pop anthems in front of a laughing and benevolent audience. New
album expected this summer. Photos: THOMAS MEYER. OSTKREUZ

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1568

For five years, Mains d\'OEuvres, in Saint-Ouen (Seine-Saint-Denis), has
been experimenting with a unique artistic project: hosting artists
(choreographers, visual artists, musicians, etc.) in residence, focusing
on emerging disciplines and projects that address social issues. Art is
not an end in itself; it is also an instrument of social transformation.
Mains d\'OEuvres is also a place of celebration where concerts and
performances take place one after the other. Rather unknown to the
general public, Mains d\'OEuvres has become a reference in the landscape
of cultural wastelands that developed in France in the 1970s and 1980s,
at the initiative of individuals who considered the offering to be too
compartmentalized, elitist and leaving aside a whole field of
contemporary art. They began to occupy empty spaces, often former
factories, as one conquers a territory. Housed in the premises of a
former social committee of the Valeo factories, the Mains d\'OEuvres
association is both a large machine, with around twenty employees, and a
precarious object. The budget is 1.1 million euros, including 484,000
euros of own resources (ticketing, restaurant, rental of recording
studios, spaces for events, etc.), essential to the survival of the
wasteland. The artists also fuel the turbine by paying rent in return
for the provision of the premises, and by renting out the rehearsal
spaces. For example, a theatre company pays 80 euros per month for an
office and an Internet connection. Public subsidies (city, state,
department, region) amount to around 400,000 euros. The support of the
town hall is essential, even if the place does not cost it very much:
the town pays 83,500 euros but receives 69,000 euros in rent in return.
Fazette Bordage, who has been running Mains d\'OEuvres since January
2001, is one of the pioneers of wasteland. In the 1980s, she created
Confort moderne in Poitiers. She founded Mains d\'OEuvres with
Christophe Pasquet, who has led various occupation projects, and now
runs Point éphémère in the 10th arrondissement of Paris. To feel the
soul of the place, you have to wander around the immense 4,000 m2 brick
building, spread over four levels. In the basement, along the recording
studios, you can hear all sorts of music. One floor above, residents are
taking a break in the restaurant. A little higher up, a choreographer is
preparing her creation. An employee pokes his head into a workshop to
fix yet another technical problem\... The project is centered on hosting
artists, researchers or associations defending a \"citizen\" project in
residence for a period of one year, renewable. \"The current crisis is
not economic, I analyze it as the result of a narrowing of the
frameworks. We compartmentalize people and reduce possibilities,\"
summarizes Fazette Bordage. RESIDENTS, COLLEGE STUDENTS, ARTISTS The
occupation of the place was negotiated with the communist town hall of
Saint-Ouen, which is the owner. \"They arrived in September 1997. Their
artistic project was of quality. They were ready to pay rent,\"
remembers Eric Hervieu, elected delegate for culture. The two parties
set themselves common objectives: \"Complement the local cultural offer;
reach the young people of Saint-Ouen, the innovative actors,\" he adds.
Five years later, he believes that the contract has been fulfilled, even
if, \"intuitively\", he thinks that the audience of the place is \"not
mainly from Saint-Ouen, but Parisian\". Some projects, such as that of
the Studio de sculpture sociale, which does writing and video work with
residents of Saint-Ouen and the 18th arrondissement of Paris, help to
raise awareness among the population. Artists also organize workshops
with the Michelet college. \"For some students who have difficulty
finalizing a work, seeing the artists rehearse and construct a creation
is very stimulating\", summarizes Laure Laborde, the principal education
advisor. The conditions for welcoming the artists are not luxurious.
Mains d\'OEuvres does not have any budget to support the creations. The
artists benefit, however, from the skills of the team and its contacts.
The Ktha company, in residence since the end of 2003, will leave the
place in October. For this young company, which rehearsed \"in hangars
or apartments\", the time spent at Mains d\'OEuvres was \"a
springboard\": \"Here, we found acceptable working conditions. The team
supported and advised us, it changed our lives. We found co-productions
with other places. Outside, the Mains d\'OEuvres label is important\",
says Nicolas Werken, who directs texts by Christophe d\'Hallivillée with
Lear Packer (Sens and Tonka editions). \"The team did a lot of
communication work to bring in programmers. Mains d\'OEuvres does not
put itself on the fringes of institutions\", says choreographer Kataline
Patkaï, who has just presented her creation as part of the Faits
d\'Hiver festival. The Art Sensitif association, which produces digital
works using free software, is not about to leave. Mains d\'OEuvres has
just won a grant of \"35,000 euros\" that will allow it to develop a
resource center on site. \"I finally found a place that understands my
project. Instead of everyone working at home, we exchange ideas, we move
forward,\" says Jean-Noël Montagné, who develops his inventions with
CNRS researchers. They travel all over Paris to come here. It\'s good
that something is happening\...\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1569

Bandits-Mages, a digital arts festival, is focusing on \"Television, the
media, gaming\" for this ninth edition. A theme dissected over four days
by a rich video program, a focus on Danish creation, performances,
digital installations (including Trigger by Michaël Sellam, an
interactive version of the film Elephant by Alan Clarke), round tables
on alternative televisions, free software, and the relationship between
gaming and cinema. Everything is broadcast on the satellite TV channel
Lalocale and streamed live on the Internet, so as not to miss a crumb.
As part of the Spectrographie program, a panorama of visual and sound
creation based on the electromagnetic spectrum, the Ellipse association
proposes to remix digital satellite television, to reprocess intercepted
images live and to make small television interludes (Zapsat). On
February 3, she is organizing an evening of concert-performances with,
among others, Rodolphe Burger and Yves Dormoy, who will present a
creation around their album Planétarium. Students from art schools will
compete in a friendly manner during the Videodemoparty 0.1, where they
will have to create a video on a set theme. Charles Pennequin and Joël
Hubaut will delight fans of sound poetry who will also be able to listen
to Poulpe, an installation by Apo33 that captures sounds in different
locations in Orléans, Bourges and Tours, streams remixed and rebroadcast
in situ or online on their webradio.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1570

FRAUD. Customers of Crédit Lyonnais, beware: criminals are sending
emails imitating those of the banking group in order to steal your login
details. This is the first time that this type of scam, known as
\"phishing\", has targeted the French public on such a large scale.
Written in questionable French, the letter headed by LCL claims that a
new security system is being tested and that the customer must click on
a link to connect to their bank\'s website, which is also a fake.
TELEPHONY. Internet service provider Alice has announced that its
AliceBox plan will now include calls to numbers starting with 087, i.e.
the numbers of subscribers to the Free (FreeBox) and Wanadoo (LiveBox)
offers. These calls will therefore be free, as will calls to landlines
and emergency numbers. This news has the effect of a bombshell for
operators who, like Free, boast about their free telephone offer but
charge for calls to direct competitors. INTERNET. After the Ministry of
Culture and other administrations, it is the National Gendarmerie that
has decided to replace Internet Explorer with Firefox on its 70,000
computer workstations. Main arguments: reliability, security, compliance
with Internet standards and adaptation to different types of computers
(Windows, Mac and Linux). In addition, the Thunderbird messaging
software, also published by the Mozilla Foundation, will replace
Microsoft Outlook. The gendarmerie had already decided to adopt the
OpenOffice office suite, also from the free software community.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1571

This is the country that invented reality TV, Big Brother and its
offspring that have colonized all the small screens on the planet. It is
also in the Netherlands that \"Exploding Television\" is currently being
held, the experimental section of the Rotterdam International Film
Festival that, for eleven years, has been rummaging around the margins
of cinema (clips, Internet, video games, sound) and scrutinizing the
mutations of audiovisual culture. This year, \"Exploding\" deciphers
television, reversing the logic at work in reality shows: \"We are not
dealing with innocent victims, prey to voyeuristic cameras,\" explains
curator Edwin Carels. \"Here, the camera changes hands.\" The building
that houses the TENT. visual arts and Witte de With contemporary art
centers has been transformed into a teeming, flashing hive. Five
collectives from Copenhagen, Bologna, London, Vilnius and Rotterdam have
set up their studios there, amidst artistic installations, organising
workshops, screenings and conferences broadcast on the Internet and on
Dutch cable. \"We are now witnessing a proliferation of channels, but
the content is the same everywhere,\" notes the curator. \"Satellite of
Love\" is not a meta-exhibition on television, observed from a distance,
but rather an active, productive gesture. A place where television will
be made but also rethought and perhaps modestly reinvented. It is time
to regain this public space, monopolized by the State and then by
merchants.\" Demystify. Production methods long reserved for
professionals are increasingly being questioned by amateurs. \"The idea
that television is a simple propaganda machine only persists until we
realise that television is not there to manipulate but to be
manipulated,\" analyses Rachel Baker, a net artist. It is therefore not
surprising that the Telestreet phenomenon (Libération, September 9)
broke out in Berlusconi\'s Italy, in reaction to the suffocating
situation resulting from the collusion between power and the media (read
below). Creating your own station is not reserved for nerds. Tetsuo
Kogawa, a Japanese media artist, set about demystifying the technology
by giving a short practical course on \"how to build a micro TV
transmitter\" (1) to young, hard-working people who came in large
numbers to handle the soldering iron in the Silent_TV workshop run by
Adam Hyde. Andy from the Yes Men, kings of media imposture, also got
involved. \"Is it legal?\" asks one of the participants. \"As long as
you don\'t use it,\" smiles Adam. Tv-tv, a network of independent
producers from Copenhagen, who have the advantage of having an official
broadcast channel, raises the difficulty of escaping the television
aesthetic, of inventing new forms. CAC-TV, a program from the Vilnius
Contemporary Art Center broadcast on a commercial channel, and piloted
by Rai, a sort of Lithuanian Andy Warhol, sees television as a
playground and experimentation ground. The motto: \"Each program is a
pilot. Each program is the last.\" The result (produced by people who
have no experience in the field) is pleasantly wobbly and original,
summed up by a local newspaper, which headlined when it was launched a
year ago: \"Beavis and Butthead do Dogma in Vilnius.\" In Rotterdam,
CAC-TV invites the public to a TV evening where they will try to
communicate with the spirits of deceased stars of the small screen. On
the same floor, visitors can practice the art of teletext, rehabilitated
by Lektrolab (2), which is enthusiastic about this aesthetic reminiscent
of old video games. Thanks to free software, made available, anyone can
tinker with a teletext that will be displayed on pages 450 to 455 of
Dutch public television. \"Satellite of Love\" brings together in the
same space two environments that rarely meet, media activists who have
their hands in the grease and visual artists who cast an oblique glance
at the black box, the frenzy of some and the almost contemplative
detachment of others: deserted TV sets by Michel François (Fox TV) and
Melik Ohanian (Hit), behind the scenes (the special effects on a blue
background by AL & AL or the models by Pierre Bismuth and Michel
Gondry), perpetual television flow transformed into visual abstraction
(Sauter & Khan) or reduced to luminous pixels (Bulloch). \"I wanted to
create areas of contrast, to see how these two approaches could feed off
each other,\" explains the curator. The video The Night Watch by the
Belgian artist Francis Alÿs, which follows, through the eyes of the
museum\'s surveillance cameras, a fox lost in a portrait gallery, echoes
AmbientTV.net\'s Broadband Highway (3), a road movie made from images
from webcams monitoring global road traffic, video streams diverted by a
program and edited live to make a real-time film that generates itself
24 hours a day. The London collective has also just launched a Manifesto
for CCTV Filmmakers, a charter for a new kind of filmmaker who does not
shoot with their own camera but uses recordings from the video
surveillance cameras that are proliferating in the United Kingdom. The
manifesto is based on the legislation protecting private data that
allows people filmed to request a copy of these recordings. Practical
guide. \"The convergence of the Internet, television and cinema is
changing our habits,\" says Rachel Baker of AmbientTV. \"Multiple
channels, file-sharing software and broadband are radically changing the
way we watch television. For her, the latest TV masses are reality TV
and football. \"But while at work we talk about the latest episode of
Big Brother, at home our computers are frantically downloading entire
seasons of Lost.\" The division between production, consumption and
distribution is also collapsing. More and more people are producing
their own videos and posting them on the Web. The programming schedule
has exploded. In Unscheduled Television, the net-artist opens a
repertoire of projects by artists who experiment with available
technologies, remixing existing TV shows, found footage, video blogs,
online archives, like this hilarious remix of horror films, How to
Survive a Zombie Epidemic, a practical guide to resisting an attack by
the living dead. So many paths for an alternative television, also on
the program of the Bandits-Mages festival which begins today in Bourges,
and which will be linked to the Internet with \"Exploding Television\"
at 3 p.m. for a discussion on the interactions between art and
television. (1) http://anarchy.translocal.jp/microtv/howtotvtx.html (2)
http://projects.lektrolab.com/microtel (3)
www.ambienttv.net/unscheduledtv

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1572

The Compagnie Larivée, Cabot, Champagne (La Tribu, Parallell, La
Tulipe\...) has finally put the new version of its website online. The
old site, frankly quite ugly, had been announcing a redesign for several
months already. The wait will have been worth it: the design is pleasant
and reveals news about the artists of the La Tribu / La Factrie /
Paralell stable, the calendars of events at the different venues managed
by the group and a link to the online store. In addition, you have the
leisure to watch (in streaming) the clips of the artists, and, above
all, to create your own \"radio-Tribu\". More than fifty songs from
which you can create a personal playlist. Only problem: during our
visit, the Listening Post did not work under Firefox, forcing us to
return to Internet Explorer to be able to enjoy it. Hadn\'t the Cowboys
Fringants espoused the cause of free software? Ah, no, maybe not that
one, after all\... www.latribu.ca and www.getfirefox.com Mercora
Following the buzz of personalized radio stations like Pandora and
Last.fm, here is Mercora, the web radio where you become the
broadcaster. Simply put, it is a (free) application that you install and
through which you make your collection of music files available to other
Mercora users. The difference between this application and P2P networks
like Limewire or eDonkey is that instead of downloading the files, you
stream other users\' collections and allow them to listen to yours
without being accused of piracy. Mercora also includes an instant
messaging system and hosts discussion forums - during my visit, more
than forty Quebec users were online. However, several observers question
the usefulness of Mercora: would music lovers prefer to have the file on
their hard drive rather than listen to it in streaming? You be the
judge. www.mercora.com Paid plagiarism Ben Gibbard, of the band Death
Cab For Cutie and frontman of The Postal Service, accuses Apple of
plagiarizing the video of his song Such Great Heights for his TV ad
promoting the Intel chip in its new computers. On his website, Gibbard
accuses Apple of having retaken \"shot by shot\" his video, in addition
to having hired the same directors. The irony of this little controversy
is that the video for Such Great Heights now occupies the number one
position in sales of clips on the iTunes Music Store\... A visit to The
Postal Service\'s site will allow you to download the single and its
version remixed by John Tejada for free. www.postalservicemusic.net
Random\... His name is Mitch Benn, he is a British comedian and with his
band The Distractions, he launched the \"hit\" Everything Sounds Like
Coldplay Now. He even bought the domain name
www.everythingsoundslikecoldplaynow.com , where you can see the parody
video of his song. Anyone offer to become the buyer of
www.everythingsoundslikefranzferdinandnow.com ? Speaking of Franz
Ferdinand, Sony has just put on the market a limited edition of its
pretty Sony NW A-1000 mp3 player (which now accepts WMA formats)
featuring the design of the popular rock band. Quietly launched in
Canada just before the holiday season, the NW A-1000 seeks to compete
with Apple\'s iPod Mini/Nano (which, incidentally, had launched the iPod
U2), with its 6GB hard drive. Only 1000 copies of the Network Walkman
Franz Ferdinand were shipped to retailers. Find all the columns on
www.cyberpresse.ca/musique IN THE DIGITAL MUSIC CHARTS TOP 5 SINGLES
SALES 1- Check On It Beyoncé & Slim Thug 2- Dance, Dance Fall Out Boy 3-
LOVE Ashley Simpson 4- You\'re Beautiful James Blunt 5- Hung Up -
Madonna Source: iTunes Canada, 01/26/06 TOP 5 ALBUMS SALES 1- iTunes
Originals: Barenaked Ladies (compilation) Barenaked Ladies 2- Brokeback
Mountain (meh) Various artists 3- Lights and Sounds Yellowcard 4-
Testify POD 5- Back to Bedlam James Blunt Source: iTunes Canada,
01/26/06 TOP 5 SHARED MUSIC FILES 1- Check On It Beyoncé 2- Grillz Nelly
3- Dance, Dance Fall Out Boy 4- Run It Chris Brown 5- In Love With a
StripperT-pain Source: Big Champagne from January 16 to 23, 2006

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1573

The recent debate on copyright eludes a crucial question: what vision
for digital culture in ten years? Internet users are in daily contact
with online music, for which they invent new practices: exchanges,
listening and participatory discoveries are already the reality of the 5
million French people who own MP3 players. Alongside the locked legal
offers, which the Minister of Culture has championed, an incredible
proliferation of cultural initiatives is developing: artists of the MP3
generation, web radios, participatory architectures, of which
peer-to-peer is only the tip of the iceberg. The culture of 2010 is
already being invented today. Here are three proposals to support this
vigorous movement that urgently deserves an ambitious policy. 1. Create
a real digital public service. Ten years after the democratization of
the Internet, it is time for the State to assume its responsibilities in
the face of History: it is the totality of knowledge in the public
domain, the entire French cultural heritage, financed by the State, that
must be put online without delay! By encouraging its appropriation by
the public. In the name of equal opportunities, but above all to affirm
our cultural independence and influence. Open formats without locks,
free software, peer-to-peer and collaborative architectures are already
the foundations of a new relationship between the citizen and culture.
The State must seize them to become a catalyst for new industrial and
cultural jobs. 2. Establish a regulatory authority. In an economy of
cultural abundance, the State must play a leading role in getting
cultural industries to adapt to the realities of the Internet. In a
world where access to everything is becoming the rule, it is essential
to bring the flexibility and inventiveness of new players. The main
obstacle to the development of online music is that supply does not meet
demand, because it is subject to the sole arbitration of the record
industry and its monopoly on copyright. How could we have imagined the
revolution of free radio stations without the creation of new radio
stations? As with telephony and Internet access, a regulatory authority
must be created capable of imposing in stages access to the entire music
catalogue for the commercial services that are waiting for it.
Otherwise, who can blame those who prefer to turn to peer-to-peer? 3.
Help cultural industries stay in the race. Digital music is above all a
profession of innovation and an opportunity to create jobs. They should
be encouraged massively by opening up innovation support mechanisms to
them: tax credits, aid for new professions, support for digital
distribution and export, digitization of difficult catalogues, etc. What
is France waiting for to play a leading role in convincing its European
partners to do the same? We are not legislating for 2006, but for 2010,
or even 2015, and for a world of innovation, culture and knowledge. This
new century of Enlightenment must not leave our country a mere
supporting role. Tariq Krim is the founder of the Netvibes.com service
and the editor of GénérationMP3.com, a French-speaking community
dedicated to music on the Internet.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1574

Brussels - The European Commission, which condemned Microsoft in 2004
for abuse of a dominant position, yesterday played down the group\'s new
concessions. The day after the media event organised by Microsoft just a
stone\'s throw from its offices, the Commission abandoned its caution of
the day before. \"Source code is not the ultimate documentation of
anything, and that is precisely why programmers must provide
comprehensible documentation in parallel with their source code\", said
Competition Commissioner Neelie Kroes yesterday at the Davos Forum,
quoted by her spokesperson Jonathan Todd. The source code \"offered\" by
Microsoft on Wednesday is a set of instructions written in a computer
programming language. To ensure, as the Commission demanded two years
ago, the harmonious and efficient operation of Windows with computers
using other operating systems, and thus allow competition, Microsoft had
so far provided 12,000 pages of documentation and offered 500 hours of
technical assistance. \"They could give us half a million pages, but if
it\'s not the right information for competitors to write software
that\'s compatible with Windows, then they\'re not meeting our
requirements,\" Todd said yesterday. The European Free Software
Foundation (EFSF) said the mountain of data would \"cause more
problems\" than it would solve. \"Because the source code is
copyrighted, programmers who read it will not be able to reuse it in
their free software,\" it said, without being sued by Microsoft for
copyright infringement.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1575

In literature, they are called negroes; in IT, ghost-programmers.
Whether they line up letters or numbers, they work in the shadows in the
service of their employer. An artist, for example, who we like to
imagine as handicapped with the keyboard, quick to delegate the
technical aspects to the code stokers. Not at all, artist programmers
are a developing species in digital arts, more and more numerous to get
their hands dirty to forge their own tools. Handling computer code with
ease, they strive to master the entire chain of creation. They are in
the spotlight at the Make Art festival, launched by the young Poitevin
association Goto10, created in 2003 by Aymeric Mansoux, digital artist,
and Thomas Vriet, passionate about electronic and experimental music,
host on the associative radio Atmosphère (1). In addition to events
dedicated to digital arts, Goto10 regularly organizes software tool
design workshops for artists and brings together a collective of a dozen
artists scattered across Europe. A commendable desire. From Tuesday to
Sunday evening, the festival is working to introduce these programming
artists and, more broadly, the culture of free software through
workshops (Pure Data), conferences (streamed on the Internet),
performances and concerts, in line with cutting-edge festivals such as
Placard, Piksel (Norway), Pixelache (Finland) or networks such as
Nettime, Dorkbot (where people do weird things with electricity),
Riereta and Hackitectura (Spain). \"We wanted to take the time to gently
introduce the general public, and not just connoisseurs, to this
culture, with conferences that explain what free software is, what a
tool is, what a license is. Show them the approach of a software artist,
both his programming work which is a form of artistic creation and its
result, whether it is music, visuals, games\... explains Aymeric. We
want to try to explain in a simple way why a line of code can be
validated as a poetic expression.\" A laudable desire, because these
works are often complex to understand. The best way to understand a work
is to show how it was created. The performance by Dave Griffiths and
Yaxu, tomorrow night at the Confort Moderne, is emblematic in this
respect. The two artists will program their sounds and images as they go
along. The lines of code typed in their interconnected environments are
projected, the audience can follow what is happening on their screens,
read this improvised score and appreciate the result. The opposite of a
laptop concert. They will share the bill the same evening with another
figure of this underground scene, Tom Betts, aka Nullpointer, a
multi-talented English artist, author of collaborative network projects,
video game hijacking, musical performances and even an automatic radio
station on the Net, Rand () %. The educational will of the festival is
coupled with a political intention, the tools used are never neutral.
\"The guest artists are registered in communities that develop free
software, they are also people who refuse to be registered in copyright
systems, who arrange to self-disseminate their works on Internet labels,
under Creative Commons license. They are completely independent,
explains the festival programmer. We all come from the alternative
electronic scene, where the use of Linux and free software is very
widespread, it is obvious to us.\" They observe this \"offbeat\" fight
against piracy, intellectual property. \"We have moved to the next level
where the question of authorship of a work no longer arises, where we
favor exchange and collaboration,\" says Aymeric. \"There is an
effervescence and a desire to develop collectively that we do not find
in commercial software,\" adds Thomas. Utopian society. Spring_alpha, a
network game presented this evening by Simon Yuill, imagines what a
society could be like in the era of free software (2). This game under
free license, in development for two years, tells the story of an urban
community\'s attempt to create its own utopian society, with the
possibility for users to change the rules that govern life in society,
by hacking and altering the code that simulates this world. No joystick:
the only way to interact with this universe is to manipulate the usually
hidden code and immediately observe the consequences on the game. \"It
allows you to enter this hacker\'s universe, to empirically test how it
works. The 15-16 year olds are completely comfortable with it, they all
program small scripts, create game modifications like Quake. For them,
P2P, file sharing, is not a crime. That is also why there is a
generational conflict, a clash between the proprietary world and the
free world, for the moment the two coexist, but within ten years, this
culture will be integrated into people\'s daily lives.\" Goto10\'s
commitment to the free software field is also reflected in the imminent
launch of a live CD (3), produced with the help of the Italian rasta
coder Jaromil (http://rastasoft.org) to facilitate access to this free
software, a real nomadic workstation, of professional quality, for audio
and video creation, whose release is planned within two months. (1)
atmosphereradio.free.fr (2) www.spring-alpha.org (3) CD Rom which
automatically loads an operating system with a set of software when the
computer starts up without affecting the hard disk.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1576

To meet the requirements of the European Union, Brad Smith, Microsoft\'s
legal director, revealed on Wednesday, January 25, that the company
would offer a license for all source codes (the equivalent of software
keys) concerned. The source codes in question have nothing to do with
those of Windows XP or even with those of the Windows Server operating
system. Thaima Samman, Microsoft France\'s legal and public affairs
director, specifies that this opening is limited to \"Windows Server
communication protocols.\" The announcement therefore concerns software
that allows servers, these computers located at the heart of networks
such as the Internet, to communicate with each other. It will allow Sun
and publishers of free software such as Linux, competitors of Bill
Gates\' company, to make servers using their operating system
communicate with those running Windows Server. These competitors will
thus access the market of companies wanting to use Microsoft servers and
those of other brands on the same network. \"We had proposed 12,000
pages of documentation and 500 hours of training,\" says Ms. Samman. But
this was not considered sufficient by Brussels. Hence the decision to go
as far as opening the source codes. HEARINGS EXPECTED IN APRIL This
announcement constitutes a new stage in the conflict between Microsoft
and the European Commission. In March 2004, the latter fined the
American software manufacturer 497 million euros for abuse of a dominant
position. Mario Monti, the competition commissioner at the time,
accompanied this record penalty with \"corrective measures\" in order to
force Microsoft to change its commercial practices. The company has
appealed this decision before the European Court of Justice. The
hearings will take place in April. The appeal is not suspensive but,
twenty-two months later, the decision has still not been implemented in
its entirety. On 21 December 2005, Brussels had ordered Microsoft to
respond, by 15 February, to a \"statement of objections\" noting the
\"non-compliance\" with the sentence. The provision of the interface
specifications proposed by Microsoft was considered \"incomplete and
inadequate\". The Commission had even threatened Bill Gates\' company
with daily fines of 2 million euros. After Microsoft\'s announcement,
the entourage of Neelie Kroes, the Competition Commissioner, remained on
its guard: \"They sent a letter ten minutes before their press
conference; but we don\'t know in detail what they plan to do\", they
say in Brussels, promising to \"carefully examine\" Microsoft\'s offer.
On the other hand, in Washington, the Association for Competitive
Technology (ACT) considers that \"being able to access the source codes
of Windows Server goes beyond what the Commission could have dreamed
of\".

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1577

IT. The European Commissioner for Competition is not convinced by
Microsoft\'s (Bill Gates in our photo) decision to provide the Windows
source code: \"The source code is not the ultimate documentation of
anything. That is why programmers must provide understandable
documentation \[with it\]\", she said at the Davos Forum. The European
Free Software Foundation sees it as \"a new marketing plot: Microsoft
has acted like a thief who, when asked to drop his gun, takes the
opportunity to throw a grenade at you\".

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1578

Brussels - Slammed by the European Commission, the American software
giant Microsoft created a surprise yesterday in Brussels by opening up
to software publishers the sacrosanct Windows source code, the true DNA
of its flagship operating system. \"We will issue licenses for the
Windows source code itself,\" announced Microsoft\'s director of legal
affairs, Brad Smith, during a press conference, explaining that the
group \"was taking this step voluntarily in order to respond
categorically to the problems raised by the Commission on December 22.\"
Convicted in March 2004 by the Commission for abuse of a dominant
position, the world\'s number one software company has already paid a
record fine of 497 million euros. It was also forced to disclose certain
computer protocols necessary for dialogue between Windows and competing
products. On 22 December, Competition Commissioner Neelie Kroes raised
her voice, judging that the documentation provided by Microsoft was as
\"inadequate\" as it was \"incomplete\". Tired of this incessant
haggling, she issued a written order to the American group to comply
immediately with her demands, under penalty of daily fines of up to two
million euros. The group had until 15 February to justify itself, but it
finally got ahead of the call by going \"well beyond the Commission\'s
requirements\", according to it, by deciding to open up its precious
source code to purchasers of Windows licenses, at no extra cost. The
source code brings together all the information at the origin of a
computer program. A computer scientist can modify the program using this
source code. \"This code is the DNA of the Windows operating system
\[\...\], it is the ultimate documentation that we can provide,\" said
Mr. Smith, but ruled out communicating it to free software publishers,
who could then distribute it freely. \"The requirement for clear and
appropriate documentation should be clearly satisfied,\" considers the
number three at Microsoft. Cautious reaction Far from being pleased, the
Commission limited itself to saying that it would \"carefully examine\"
this announcement. Earlier in the day, it had firmly reiterated that it
was up to it and not Microsoft to decide whether its requirements were
met. For Brad Smith, \"setting aside questions of technical conformity\"
was an essential prerequisite before \"progressing seriously on the
substance of the case\". In June 2004, Microsoft asked the European
Court of Justice to annul the conviction handed down by the Commission.
The hearings will take place between April 24 and 28 in Luxembourg. Mr.
Smith considers this step crucial because the judges in Luxembourg will
\"establish the law that will determine whether companies that own
popular technology products can integrate new features into them\" and
when they must provide their competitors with licenses on certain
intellectual property rights. While one might have expected cries of
victory from Microsoft\'s opponents, yesterday it was quite different.
For Me Thomas Vinje, who represents several opponents of Microsoft, this
concession \"has no value and resolves nothing.\" \"These millions of
lines of code are useless because they are incomprehensible; it\'s like
looking for a needle in a haystack!\" he laments. \"It\'s as if we were
given all the technical data of an Airbus, without providing the plan,\"
adds a source close to the case for whom \"it\'s difficult to use.\"
Above all, he notes, this greatly damages the credibility of Microsoft,
which for two years cried wolf, claiming that revealing its source code
would be monstrous, even technically impossible.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1579

MICROSOFT Microsoft\'s move is not lacking in panache. Yesterday in
Brussels, Brad Smith, the director of legal affairs for the world leader
in software, announced that he was ending the standoff with the European
Commission that had been going on since March 2004. \"We are going to
provide access to the Windows \"source code\", which is a bit like the
DNA of the server,\" declared Brad Smith. \"This will not change the
price of our licenses.\" The source code groups together all the
information that makes up a computer program. However, Brad Smith
specified that it was not a question of offering an \"open source\"
solution, i.e. one that is free of rights. The American giant had until
February 15 to respond to the injunction from the European Commission,
which had demanded, on December 21, that Microsoft provide all the
technical documentation on Windows in order to allow its competitors,
server manufacturers, to have access to the Windows interfaces. The
sanctions set by the Commission were impressive: 2 million euros per
day. \"We are putting our most valuable intellectual property on the
table,\" said the legal director. \"In this way, we are calming down
technical disputes and we can move forward with a serious discussion on
the substance of this matter.\" Instead of providing thousands of pages
of technical documentation, Microsoft is therefore pretending to throw
open the doors of its vault. The question is what the world leader will
really reveal to its competitors. Especially since Bill Gates\' company
is preparing the advent of a new operating system that is to succeed
Windows: Vista. Will the source code of Vista also be revealed? The news
received with caution The European Commission has welcomed the statement
by the American leader with caution. \"The European Commission will
carefully examine the announcement made by Microsoft once it has
received all the details,\" the press release explains. Microsoft
believes that this measure goes \"well beyond the Commission\'s
requirements. \"Even though we believe we are in full compliance with
the 2004 decision, we want to dispel any suspicion that Microsoft\'s
technical documentation is insufficient,\" said Brad Smith, hoping that
the European executive would refrain from imposing new fines.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1580

In Brussels Faced with the threat of daily fines of 2 million euros from
the European Commission, Microsoft has given ground. Its director of
legal affairs, Brad Smith, announced yesterday that the American giant
would communicate to software publishers the sacrosanct source code of
Windows, the operating system for PCs. The source code is the top secret
element that Microsoft has been defending tooth and nail for years,
because it translates into understandable language the information that
is the source of a computer program. To understand the dispute that is
currently opposing Microsoft to the European Commission, we must go back
two years. In March 2004, the IT group was convicted of abuse of a
dominant position. The latter imposed a record fine: 500 million euros.
And demanded that Microsoft disclose certain IT protocols allowing
\"interoperability\" or compatibility between the Windows operating
system and competing software publishers. Faced with Microsoft\'s
unwillingness, Commissioner Neelie Kroes raised her voice in December,
adopting a \"statement of objections\" against Microsoft, for
non-compliance with its obligations, and the fines. The software leader
was due to explain itself by 15 February at the latest. Microsoft did
not wait for the axe to fall and decided to take a step towards
Brussels. Specifying through Brad Smith: \"This code is the DNA of the
Windows operating system. It is the ultimate documentation that we can
provide to Windows license purchasers, at no extra cost.\" But the
services of the European Directorate-General for Competition remain
reserved. Because the source code is still inaccessible to free software
publishers. In a weary press release, the Commission renews the meeting
of 15 February.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1581

Initially, you wanted BitTorrent to be free software, and you let
Internet users create a free exchange network. Why did you suddenly
decide to create a paid and controlled service? Suddenly, BitTorrent was
so in demand all over the world, its popularity became so massive, that
it was ridiculous. The opportunity to make a lot of money was simply too
huge, psychologically I found myself almost forced to take advantage of
it. Following your first agreement with the Motion Picture Association
of America \[MPAA\], what do you want to obtain from the Hollywood
Majors? My plan is simple: BitTorrent will obtain distribution licenses
from copyright holders, and I will sell their films on the Internet.
Technically, this is not a problem. I cannot speak about the current
negotiations, but they are progressing. The acquisition of cultural
products via the Internet is a given. Habits are formed, the system is
in place. Soon, the majority of consumers will want to obtain their
music and films online, without leaving their homes. The film industry
is starting to realize this, its attitude is changing rapidly. But in
the meantime, other BitTorrent servers will continue to offer pirated
videos for free? Piracy will always exist, and besides I\'m not sure
that it will make producers and artists lose a lot of money. The right
tactic is rather to offer, in parallel, a paid and legitimate offer. If
it is well done, it will attract customers and make money for copyright
holders. If there are no buyers today, it is only because there are no
sellers. We will offer a huge catalog of films of all kinds, our offer
will be more varied than that of unlicensed sites. My site will be very
pleasant and very cool, transactions will be easy and without risk. So,
everything will be fine for producers? No, at least not for the music
industry. Its business model is obsolete, for reasons related to new
computer tools, but which have nothing to do with piracy. Music is
becoming a hyper-competitive market: soon, a lone musician will be able
to record a quality product in his dining room, with equipment that is
both cheap and efficient. Production costs are collapsing, it will
become difficult to make big profits in such an overcrowded environment.
Good old competition will hurt the record industry much more than
piracy. Moreover, for distribution companies, the end is near, even if
they have not yet accepted it. The cost of bandwidth is tending towards
zero, and hard drives are becoming so huge and so cheap that, soon, all
the music and movies you will ever own will fit in a single box. All
this heavy logistics of burning CDs and DVDs, storing them in
warehouses, transporting them in trucks, stacking them in stores,
driving to buy them, all of this will soon be obsolete. When you think
about it, it is completely ridiculous and irrational to distribute
digital products on physical media. Are you in favor of installing
protections to prevent CD and DVD buyers from making copies? Today, in
the United States, not only is it illegal to break these protection
systems, but it is illegal to conduct research on theoretical ways to
break them. This is abusive: in a free country, we should have the right
to conduct any type of scientific research. Moreover, the only way to
know if a protection is effective is to test it, that is to say to try
to break it. Otherwise, the authors of protection software will be able
to sell to producers and the public any poor quality product. Besides,
any protection is doomed to be broken. Personally, I think that the only
way to reduce piracy is not to punish potential customers, but to offer
on the Internet all existing works, at a reasonable price, with easy and
pleasant purchase systems. What do you think of the current French
debate on the global license and private copying? From what I
understand, the reasoning of the supporters of the global license is
based on completely outdated notions. The analogy with radio does not
hold. On the Internet, we do not need to make rough estimates: if we
have a good system - like BitTorrent -, we can obtain precise
information on everything that users do, and charge each according to
their consumption. The flat-rate license on the Internet would create an
unfair system, both for customers and for rights holders. It could also
be a corrupt system: the distribution of money would be decided
arbitrarily, and this kind of decision cannot be properly audited. If
you met French parliamentarians, what would you have to say to them? To
those who voted for the law on the global license, I would say: your
goal is to make culture accessible to all through the Internet, that\'s
very good, but for that, there is no need to interfere with market
forces. Technical progress and economic development will push producers
to sell their products online, it is a natural process. This state
interference is useless. And to the professionals who dream of blocking
this evolution, I would say: by delaying putting your products online,
you are condemning yourselves. You will not be able to artificially
maintain a situation inherited from the past, your loss of earnings will
be enormous. In fact, you will lose everything.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1582

After the precursor Napster, then Kazaa, Gnutella, eDonkey, we are now
witnessing the arrival of the third generation of \"peer to peer\"
systems, which allow Internet users to exchange unlimited quantities of
music and videos for free. Among the newcomers, the BitTorrent network
holds a special place: thanks to its highly innovative fragmented
architecture, it allows large files to be downloaded quickly, including
copies of high-quality feature films. BitTorrent was created in 2002 by
Bram Cohen, a self-taught mathematician now aged 30 and living in
Seattle. From the outset, he decided that the software making up his
system would be free and open to all. Within a few months, hundreds of
other volunteers, American, European and Asian, took it over to set up a
vast network with relay servers on every continent. Immediately,
millions of Internet users decided to use it to exchange music and
especially video: works by independent and amateur artists, but also
many commercial films pirated from DVDs, and all the major recent
American television series. TOOL PROVIDER From the end of 2004, the
American music and film majors launched legal actions and succeeded in
shutting down several BitTorrent servers located in the United States.
On the other hand, those located in Europe and Asia remained out of
reach of American justice. Furthermore, no one directly attacked Bram
Cohen: he did not distribute pirated products himself, and only provided
a computer tool with countless \"legitimate\" uses. Today, BitTorrent
has established itself as the main sharing network in the United States
and in many countries, from China to the United Kingdom and Norway. It
is steadily gaining ground on all continents: BitTorrent files alone
represent on average between 35% and 50% of all global Internet traffic,
all categories combined. The French are starting to discover it, and
could adopt it quickly in 2006. For two years, Bram Cohen was content to
live modestly, thanks to donations sent by grateful Internet users, and
the sale of T-shirts bearing his favorite motto, \"Give, and you will
receive\". In addition, he had created a specialized search engine on
his website, allowing beginners to easily find all the films and pieces
of music existing in BitTorrent format. But, in 2005, he changed his
philosophy and decided to become an entrepreneur: he created a company
in San Francisco, found \$8 million from an investor and joined forces
with a young manager, Ashwin Navin. In November 2005, Bram Cohen reached
an agreement with the MPAA, an association of major American film
producers: BitTorrent agreed to no longer list pirated films in its
search engine - a measure that was mostly symbolic, since there are a
thousand other ways to find them. In exchange for this gesture of
goodwill, several major Hollywood studios entered into negotiations with
BitTorrent to create a paid film distribution service. Ashwin Navin,
however, is keen to point out that the major studios are not their only
potential clients: \"We also want to distribute the works of small
producers who lack the means to distribute themselves through
traditional means. Already, on BitTorrent, independent and amateur films
are probably more numerous than copies of Hollywood films. Look, for
example, at the global success of the Finnish independent film Star
Wreck (4 million downloads in a few weeks). We are going to level the
playing field, create a real equality of opportunity between large and
small producers.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1583

ON A global scale, peer-to-peer (P2P) networks, which allow unlimited
quantities of music, films, software and video games, often pirated, to
be exchanged free of charge, represent 75% of Internet traffic.
According to a September 2005 report by the Canadian company Sandvine,
which specializes in Internet traffic, France is above average: file
exchanges represent 90% of the volume of \"upstream\" traffic (leaving
individuals\' homes) and 85% of \"downstream\" traffic (arriving at
individuals\' homes). France does not control the operation of P2P
networks, which, by definition, are global. It has very little influence
on their economic and legal development, compared to the power of the
United States and the dynamism of Northern Europe. The French massively
download Anglo-Saxon music and films, and their online behavior imitates
that of Americans and Northern Europeans. At the end of 2005, the French
people\'s favorite system was eDonkey, created by MetaMachine.
Threatened with lawsuits by American music publishers, this American
company stopped distributing its free software. But eDonkey is still
thriving thanks to eMule, its improved replica created by a young
German, then perfected by volunteers from various countries and used by
nearly 90 million Internet users. The French still use Kazaa, but are
turning away from it. Since its Swedish inventor sold it to Australian
businessmen, its programs have been loaded with spyware and clandestine
advertising. The birth of Kazaa Lite, free software stripped of Kazaa\'s
undesirable functions, has not stopped this decline. French Internet
users are also adopting Gnutella, created by an informal network of
American and European libertarian hackers. A group made up of Britons,
Freenet, is preparing an encrypted system protecting the anonymity of
users. The legal attacks by the major music and film companies against
commercial P2P software publishers are in fact causing users to migrate
to purely associative and voluntary systems. France is discovering the
latest of the major exchange networks: BitTorrent, invented by a young
autodidact from San Francisco, which allows you to quickly download good
quality copies of films. The original BitTorrent software has already
been downloaded by 53 million Internet users, not counting the dozens of
clone software programs created by independents, distributed in millions
of copies. At the end of 2005, BitTorrent represented less than 5% of
P2P traffic in France, but 35% in Great Britain, 50% in the United
States, 55% in China, 60% in Norway, etc. In November 2005, BitTorrent
sealed an agreement with the MPAA (association of major American film
producers), and promised to remove links to pirated works from its
search engine. It hopes to launch a paid movie download service with the
Hollywood majors. But the many pirate sites created in Europe and Asia
using BitTorrent technology still offer free movies to Internet users
around the world.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1584

At a time when the bill on \"copyright and related rights in the
information society\" is causing a stir in the French chamber, L\'Avenir
des idées is making a significant contribution to the debate. A law
professor at Stanford University, Lawrence Lessig is the founder of
Creative Commons (1), an alternative to copyright launched in 2001 and
applied in France since November 19, 2004. It provides artists and
software creators with a flexible protection system, allowing each
author to define the rules of use that they consider acceptable. The
book by this supporter of free culture, published in 2001, reminds us
how much freedom of creativity has strengthened the Internet. How much
the freedom of cyberspace was inherent in its architecture. However, the
effervescence of innovation is undermined when \"dinosaurs\" get
involved. This study, perfectly documented, is intended to be a warning
signal. Lawrence returns at length to the free software movement, the
FreeSoftware Foundation, created in 1985 by Richard Stallman, which
aimed to encourage the development of software distributed with its
source code. \"It is not thanks to intellectual property that the great
advances of the computer age have occurred, but in spite of it,\" he
notes. For him, the digital world is closer to the world of ideas than
to the material world. And seen from this angle, the extreme protections
proposed by the law are \"neither necessary nor advantageous.\" With
case studies to support his argument, he retraces the history of
technologies, illegal at their inception, which have facilitated
consumer access to music: MP3.com, launched in 1997, which spread the
file format that has become commonplace; or Napster, the free MP3 file
exchange service, the first P2P (data exchange between Internet users)
general public service. The legal reaction of the majors was immediate.
She continues: lawsuits against P2P enthusiasts, lobbying governments to
strengthen laws, technological measures to curb copying\... With the
democratization of the Internet, fears are growing that digital
technologies will render the rights enshrined in law obsolete. To better
protect their industrial interests, cultural dinosaurs are trying to
lock up the Internet. The major risk, according to Lessig: that
innovation will end up controlled by the big owners of networks,
licenses and copyrights. That our creativity will be straitjacketed by a
centralized control architecture. The current issue is being played out
on the legal level, where the old model of intellectual property
protection no longer meets the needs of the networked society. Lessig
advocates a free culture in which creators are paid, and proposes
pragmatic and legal solutions. So that the door to a future of ideas is
not closed, at a time when technology makes the extraordinary within
reach. (1) http://fr.creativecommons.org/index.htm

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1585

The time when Google was \"only\" the most insatiable of all search
engines, with a billion queries per day, will soon be long gone. After a
2005 marked by the explosion of its advertising profits and a market
capitalization that reached 125 billion dollars, this beginning of 2006
marks an acceleration in the diversification of the new Silicon Valley
magnet towards the all-out provision of online services to Internet
users. Speaking Friday evening at the CES in Las Vegas, the major
consumer electronics show, its co-founder Larry Page announced that
Google is now also an online video distributor, a direct competitor to
cable operators and new players like Apple, and a software supplier
launched to attack the Microsoft citadel. Advertisement. Revealed by
Libération (July 26, 2005 edition), Google\'s projects in video on
demand give rise to a service for selling and renting films, series or
reports to be viewed on your computer, television or portable music
players such as the video iPod. At a time when alliances between content
providers and broadcasters are multiplying, Google has notably joined
forces with CBS to offer access to its catalog of series at \$1.99 per
episode and with the NBA to broadcast basketball games at \$3.95 each.
\"It\'s the marriage of content with the means of reaching this
content,\" summarized CBS president Leslie Moonves. The offer, which
should be enriched daily, already includes 3,000 programs. Google
promises to work so that anyone, professional or amateur, \"can tomorrow
distribute any video content\" via its site, in paid or free form, by
using advertising. While rumors of a low-cost Google PC sold at Wal-Mart
or a Google operating system have faded, the massive arrival of the
search engine on the software application market has been confirmed.
Free and downloadable from its site while waiting to be pre-installed on
computers tomorrow after signing agreements with manufacturers, the
Google pack includes a set of software intended to \"make computers
easier to use.\" War. The pack is a real declaration of war against
Microsoft since it includes, in addition to a classic antivirus (Norton)
and Adobe image software, in-house products such as Picasa (image) or
Google Earth (mapping) and products from free software such as the
Firefox browser. A set soon to be completed by the free office suite
Open Office, which challenges Microsoft at the heart of its model: the
tied and fully integrated sale of its products in PCs. An \"all-in-one\"
strategy that Microsoft has announced it will strengthen with the next
Vista operating system. By emphasizing these new activities extended to
the entire digital economy, Google has just made official the start of
an all-out war with Microsoft.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1586

On the home page, the counter is ticking relentlessly. It takes that
much to count the 10,000 to 15,000 new blogs that are added every day to
the multitude of others. On Thursday, December 29, 2005, Skyblog thus
passed the 3.5 million blog mark. These contain more than 170 million
articles and 260 million comments. Skyblog thus confirms its status as
the leading blog publisher in Europe. A real community: in total, some
2.5 million teenagers who keep their diaries online on the website,
associated with Skyrock radio. This radio, particularly at the forefront
at the time of the suburban riots, is already aimed primarily at 13-24
year-olds - there are 9 million of them in France - a generation that
has quickly adopted the new tools for dialogue and exchange. \"They are
digital natives,\" explains Pierre Bellanger, the boss of Skyrock. This
is the first time that a generation is addressing itself without an
intermediary.\" More generally, according to a Médiamétrie study
published on December 15, 2005, 8 out of 10 bloggers in France are under
24. The teen radio, with its very free tone and adept at interactivity,
has quite logically captured a large number of them with Skyblog, which
is far ahead of the platforms of the two Internet giants MSN and Google.
These 3.5 million small personal diaries represent 500,000 to 1 million
messages per day and approximately 1 gigabit of data that transits each
second on the network. A large-scale sociological database, on which the
CNRS (National Center for Scientific Research) is currently working.
While waiting for the results, at Skyrock, we already know that girls -
who keep more personal diaries on paper - publish more than boys. The
Médiamétrie survey confirms the trend: according to the institute, 54%
of bloggers are female. The blogging phenomenon is widespread, even if
it is difficult to pinpoint precisely, as the counts are complicated and
random. According to sources, there are between 50 and 70 million blogs
in the world today. At a conference held in Copenhagen in June 2005,
cross-referencing the data made it possible to draw an approximate map
of the European blogosphere. With its 3 million participants, France was
then well ahead of Great Britain (900,000 blogs) and Russia (800,000). A
little over six months later, there were 6 to 7 million \"active\" blogs
in France - or one in ten French people who had created their own blog!
-, generating about as many visits per month, according to figures from
the Heaven consulting agency, matching those of Médiamétrie. Which would
make it the second largest Internet community in the world after the
United States. And \"the blogosphere continues to double every five
months,\" they say at Heaven. The French blog already has its radio
shows (\"Revue de blogs\" on Europe 1, \"Blogs à part\" on Inter), its
TV shows (\"Blog 6\" on M6, \"Le journal du blog\" on France 5\...). It
will soon have its magazine, Netizen, on newsstands from January 26.
Published by Editions Astrolabe (Rockson Group) and produced and written
by pointblog.com, the online blogging magazine, this 84-page journal
will have an initial print run of 80,000 copies. Its goal: \"to
understand and report on the revolution we are currently experiencing,\"
explains its editor-in-chief, Cyril Fiévet, co-author of Blog Story, the
first book in French devoted to the blogging phenomenon. For him, the
blogging phenomenon is obviously the opposite of a passing fad. \"There
can certainly be a ripple effect,\" he explains. \"But here\'s the
thing: there are millions of people who didn\'t express themselves
before, who didn\'t necessarily have the means to do so, and who decide
to speak out. It\'s a global and fundamental movement.\" The rise of
blogs has also benefited from the removal of technical obstacles to
expression on the Net. \"A few years ago,\" recalls Tristan Nitot,
president of Mozilla Europe (foundation for the development of free
software), \"to create your Web page, you had to use an HTML editor,
master the language, choose a host, upload to FTP\... Today, writing a
blog is as simple as writing a post or an email. » As a result,
according to Médiamétrie, \"one in ten Internet users claims to have
created their blog\". However, creating your blog is not enough to be
read. According to the publisher Overblog, the fourth platform in
France, only 1% of blogs generate 80% of the audience. Some bloggers
have carved out a solid reputation for themselves in the French
blogosphere, generating significant traffic on their blogs. Very
influential with their readers, they can attract 3,000 to 10,000
visitors per day around unifying themes. The blog of the host Jean-Marc
Morandini, hosted by the Canalblog platform, thus extends his Europe 1
show dedicated to the media onto the Internet. It is therefore not
surprising that advertisers are taking a close interest in this new
sector, which is seriously shaking up the traditional codes of
communication. For over a year, the Influence agency has been operating
in this promising niche. Its role: to connect influential bloggers with
companies wishing to communicate in this new space. The agency has
already taken on around thirty bloggers \"who have economic potential\",
explains the agency\'s manager, Sandra Albertolli. The latter are given
an agent in the image of athletes or artists. He can help the blogger
who needs it to improve his audience in the blogosphere and thus allow
him to earn money. For brands, the agency suggests different types of
advertising presence adapted to the customs and traditions of the
blogging world, its direct and instantaneous mode of contact. For
advertisers, the investment is still modest: around 10,000 euros for a
one-week campaign on a blog. A blog that attracts 5,000 visitors can
generate a monthly turnover of 10,000 to 15,000 euros, assures us at
Influence. Where we never stop scrutinizing the blogosphere to spot the
star bloggers of tomorrow, future opinion leaders.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1587

The great smokescreen that took place during the night of December 21 in
the National Assembly, during the discussion on copyright on the
Internet, drew its strength, and its at least temporary success, from
the combination of two arguments that were allied for the occasion but
were in reality different. If this convergence only clashed with logic,
it would not be so serious. The real problem is that one of these
approaches is stupid, and the other is dangerous, and that if they have
nothing to do with each other, the stupidity of one and the harmfulness
of the other have used each other as masks to allow this sleight of
hand. The first approach says that pieces of music, films, books should
be accessible for free on the Internet. The second argues for
compensation for rights holders through a lump sum like a royalty levied
on Internet users. The first approach is just stupid. There is no reason
for these goods to be free, no reason other than the regressive demagogy
that our mercantile environment so well encourages, including under the
cover of a libertarian utopia. We can want a world where everything
would be free, a generalized potlatch, the disappearance of exchange
value leaving room only for use value. Good theorists of a political
economy of the break with the capitalist system have outlined the
issues. But to believe, or to make believe, that this could only happen
on the Internet, and for cultural goods alone, is a stupid deception.
Why don\'t the defenders of this charming program also demand to be able
to do their shopping at the grocer\'s online without paying, or to get
their medicines for free? The arts live in the world, this world, which
is a world dominated by capital and the market. The arts can play a
decisive critical role there, they cannot exist outside of it. Wanting
to exclude the arts from the world of merchandise is not liberating
them, it is killing them just as surely as wanting to submit them
entirely to the law of merchandise. It is not just demagogy to claim
that remuneration for works will only benefit the biggest, the major
record or entertainment companies, when it can and must benefit the
millions of people who work in relation to the artistic sectors. There
is also a total misunderstanding of the place of the arts in society, by
idealizing them through naivety or stupid interest, at the level of the
greed of the child who gets locked up at night in a pastry shop. But if
there was only the sole thesis of gratuity, it would never have been
able to accomplish the coup of December 21. The ambush could only
succeed, at least temporarily, by joining forces with forces that are in
fact opposed, those who argue for a flat-rate remuneration. Behind the
brave brute of free are the crooks of the paid flow. This second
approach is not stupid, it is dangerous, and even doubly dangerous. On
the one hand, this is where the real danger of a new aggravation of the
concentration of money and power in the hands of large groups lies. Who
does not see that they will have a more favorable balance of power to
appropriate the bulk of the product of a flat-rate tax, since there will
no longer be a direct link between a desired \"object\" and the money
put into circulation to acquire it? On the other hand, such a procedure
represents a considerable step in an already dominant direction: the
preeminence of the logic of flow over the logic of the work, since the
\"objects\" in question are also works. Digital, as a mode of production
and as a mode of broadcasting, multiplies the opportunities for this
fluidification that was already the hallmark of traditional television.
No more question of free here, we are ready to pay for the pipe,
especially since more and more things can pour out thanks to it, but not
what comes out of it. So what? Is it serious? Yes, it is serious.
Because it ruins the singularity of the relationship carried by these
particular objects that we call works, which means that they are not
merchandise like the others. A work results from an act, a gesture
accomplished by a person, or a small group of people, who propose a
form. A work is a formatting (of sounds, images, words, etc.) capable of
opening up to each other person who confronts it a space of sensations,
and of thought developed from these sensations. The construction of each
person as an individual, as a person with free will, is played out in
the encounter with such objects, whose particularity is to be both
identifiable, capable of being distinguished from one another, and open,
since they must leave each person the possibility of doing something for
themselves, something that is not already programmed. Flows can bring
about all sorts of useful and pleasant things in better conditions. But
there is an extreme danger in the dissolution in the logic of the flow
of what, by definition, must remain of the order of the singular, of the
distinct and this is, in principle, the case of any piece of music, any
film, any book, even if most of them do not fulfill their promise, and
the majority of them are consumed according to a desire that is not to
confront the openness of art. While this is not the case for many other
fabrications, including \"immaterial\" ones, and this is not the case
for software, a field of high inventiveness and great importance, but
which should in no way fall under the regime of works. Yes, we must
defend free software, as we must defend generic drugs. But not by
destroying the singularity of what defines works of art. The definition
and defense of these, and of the particular rights of their authors,
imply the distinction with this other logic, which is that of the
patent. In seeking cultural recognition linked to artists, patent
manufacturers (particularly for computers) are not only in the wrong
field, the confusion they generate threatens the world of works, at the
very moment when they claim to enter it. They should know how viruses
work. Jean-Michel Frodon, editorial director of Cahiers du cinéma.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1588

Dear Bénabar and dear Vincent Delerm, reading Libé, you are angry with
me as with all the other deputies who last week wanted to include the
exchange of music files in the intellectual property code. I buy all
your CDs as soon as they come out, I do not practice peer-to-peer to
download your songs, I prefer to share and keep in my own memory unique
moments like listening to Quatrième de couverture on a cool evening in
the park next to Rouen Cathedral. Wanting to be understood and to
convince those you admire is a natural feeling. The difficulty then lies
in the demands imposed on oneself to achieve this. This is the exercise
I am engaging in today by sending you this address. To be fair, should
you not first be angry with the current government that made the
disastrous choice of summoning us to the hemicycle just before Christmas
to legislate in a hurry and above all in the most total improvisation.
First of all, it is this ministerial amateurism that must be pointed
out: a bill that had been dormant in the National Assembly for more than
two years, France sanctioned twice by the European Commission for late
transposition, a report from the Law Commission that was six months old,
government amendments arriving in the middle of a general discussion,
such as the one, with its whiffs of the Cold War, on graduated response
to Internet users\... This is the reason why the socialists had
expressed their refusal to examine the text under these conditions. It
is a pity that they were not heard. After this false start and once
faced with a fait accompli, we resolutely opposed a liberticidal bill
that went well beyond the mere transposition of the European directive
and mobilized teachers, researchers, academics, librarians, archivists,
promoters of free software, consumer associations and many others
against it. I also remember that at least one of you, not so long ago,
expressed by signing a petition his refusal of all-repression on the
Web, in order not to turn more than 8 million of our fellow citizens
into potential delinquents. Just as serious in our eyes is the fact that
this bill was written to serve powerful interests, first those of the
major record companies incapable of promoting a new economic model in
the service of musical diversity, but also those of Microsoft and Apple
by wanting to kill interoperability. It is normal, in fact, that the
president of Medef, forgetting the fate that her organization reserves
for intermittent workers within Unedic, suddenly says she is \"on the
side of the artists\" against the deputies\... In this context where the
lobbies are powerful and the climate historically passionate when it
comes to literary and artistic property, the deputies, going beyond the
usual political divisions, have sought the path of general interest: the
one that reconciles freedom and responsibility, to use Jean-Marc
Ayrault\'s phrase, access for all to knowledge, learning and culture,
and the desire to pay authors and artists. We know full well that, no
more than the others, you do not live on love and fresh water, even if
since June 2003 many professionals excluded from annexes 8 and 10 of
unemployment insurance have had to return to a bohemian life that today
we more prosaically call precariousness. In this regard, let us
reestablish the truth. And there is no need to requisition the local
baker or, even stranger, to discuss the criminalization of cannabis
consumption. Legal proceedings against the public, legal uncertainty for
millions of people, lack of remuneration for downloaded and exchanged
works: this situation could not continue. At the antipodes of a logic of
free access that we reject, faithful to Beaumarchais and to collective
management, we simply did not want to delay the periodic adaptation of
copyright to technological developments. Because it is in return for the
identification of a download on the Internet for limited and
non-commercial use with an exception for private copying that, without
any possible ambiguity, we were able to enshrine in law the very
principle of your legitimate remuneration. This legal certainty which
respects the provisions of the European directive that it is up to us to
transpose and which responds to a demand of a jurisprudential nature
applies just as much to artists as to Internet users. How, indeed, can
we prohibit without sanctioning? Is it not better to authorize in order
to remunerate? As for the amount of this remuneration, which the law is
not responsible for setting, as for its method of collection and its
necessarily equitable distribution, the debate is before us. It is all
the more so since the examination of the bill in the National Assembly
was fortunately interrupted. The model of the legal license has worked
well, for some time now, for radio. Is it adaptable to the Internet for
music and cinema, being naturally excluded by the socialists because of
the chronology of the media in the form of a flat rate collected in
addition to the subscription to the access provider, and optional so as
not to forget Internet users who do not download? Are there other
models? A transitional regime could accompany the music industry in its
digital transition. Should we not, in fact, consider legislating
cautiously for a provisional period of three years? All these questions
are asked. They deserve answers. There still needs to be prior and
constructive consultation, bringing together and not dividing all the
stakeholders concerned. The Minister of Culture did not know how or did
not want to conduct this consultation before the parliamentary debate.
This is probably his main mistake. Louis Bertignac, during a radio show
in which I just took part, made this promising observation: \"It has
accelerated and, at least, now there is the debate.\" The debate, the
socialist deputies, who are on the side of the artists and who are
viscerally attached to copyright, have been waiting for this, since
November 2004, the date on which they asked the President of the
National Assembly to create a parliamentary information mission that
they have not yet obtained. So, let\'s go, and quickly! Your latest
album, dear Bénabar, is it not called Resumption of negotiations\... See
you soon. Kind regards. Patrick BLOCHE, deputy (PS) for Paris.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1589

Since March 2004, the European Commission has been demanding that the
American giant provide complete documentation of its systems in order to
allow competing software to function properly with Windows. On Thursday,
Brussels threatened the publisher with daily fines of 2 million euros if
it did not respond favorably to its injunctions within five weeks.
Bernard Benhamou, lecturer at Sciences-Po, analyzes the issues related
to this legal guerrilla warfare. Why is it so difficult to get Microsoft
to comply with the court decisions that have been notified to it?
Microsoft knows that time is on its side. For Bill Gates\' firm, it is
often preferable to incur financial penalties rather than put itself in
danger in a constantly evolving market, as demonstrated, for example, by
the position taken by Google in just a few years. How can the measures
requested by the European Commission really hinder Microsoft? To be able
to work with competing software, developers need access to what are
called APIs, which are the articulation between their programs and the
systems that will work with them, such as Windows. Microsoft maintains
that if it gives more information about these APIs, it would be possible
to create clones of its servers and, eventually, to reduce its lead to
nothing. Access to Microsoft\'s source code, revealed under pressure
from antitrust authorities, is not enough in itself to make competing
software as competitive with Microsoft. Without the documentation that
allows us to know how these systems work, this code is practically
useless. Have we entered a new phase of confrontation between Microsoft
and its competitors? Free software has become the only serious
competitors to Microsoft, with an open model as effective as proprietary
software whose economic model was created by Microsoft. The European
Commission\'s injunctions come at a time when the Internet is undergoing
profound changes and is moving from a network of computer machines to a
network that will soon connect all everyday objects (telephones, cars,
etc.). In this perspective, the need for European players to generate
competition will be all the more important as it will correspond to a
massive diffusion of these technologies in all economic sectors of our
societies. In this sense, the interoperability of the systems present on
the Internet will be the essential condition for creating new markets.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1590

In France, defending a law on copyright often allows you to leave your
name in history. After Le Chapelier, rapporteur of the very first one,
in 1791, and Jack Lang in 1985, the Minister of Culture Renaud Donnedieu
de Vabres is no exception to the rule: for two days, the beating up of
his bill on the reform of copyright in the information society by
deputies from all sides is already historic. \"We were waiting for
Malraux, we got Maginot!\" said the socialist Christian Paul the day
before yesterday. Like the line of the Minister of War in 1930, \"RDDV\"
is being overwhelmed by a parliamentary revolt against a text described
as \"liberticide\" by the UMP Alain Suguenot and a \"carte blanche to
the major record labels\" by the socialist Patrick Bloche. Until the
improbable revolt of a majority of the deputies present on the night of
Wednesday to Thursday, when a right-left alliance voted for the first
stage of a legalization of peer-to-peer exchanges against the payment of
a fee. A measure vigorously opposed by RDDV, whose text seeks on the
contrary to drive millions of Internet users towards commercial
platforms thanks to a mixture of technical measures and repression. It
reeks of lobbying. To arrive at this quagmire, the minister has
multiplied the blunders on a subject that appears to be consensual: the
political class is in fact unanimous in reforming a law overtaken by the
intensity of massively free exchanges on the Internet. But the
government\'s project, a late transposition of a European directive
(2001), ended up reeking too much of lobbying by a part of the cultural
sector. Among the dozens of examples, an amendment originally written by
Vivendi Universal is supported by the government. When the debate began
on Tuesday evening, RDDV\'s first blunder: socialist MPs complained
about the presence of representatives from Virgin and Fnac, badged
\"Ministry of Culture\", who were demonstrating paid download sites a
few metres from the chamber. The very next day, left-wing MPs rejoiced
at the publication in Libération of a column by UMP MP Bernard Carayon,
who castigated a law tailor-made for \"oligopolies apostles of
technological obscurantism\". Speakers from the right and the left
paraded on the podium, who hammered away at the main measure of the
text: the legalisation of technical protection measures (TPM) intended
to control the use of works to stem piracy. UDF member Jean Dionis du
Séjour, who was rather in favour of the law, warned that TPMs \"do not
become a weapon of war against free software\" to which the
manufacturers of these technologies (Microsoft in the lead) refuse
access. PS Didier Mathus speaks of an \"astonishing Christmas present to
Microsoft\". Socialist Pascal Terrasse of an \"anti-youth law\".
\"Graduated response\". They were heated by all those who felt ignored
by the Ministry of Culture: librarians, consumer associations, certain
artists\' unions, Internet users\' collectives\... The attempts of UMP
Dominique Richard to save Private RDDV by waving the spectre of \"the
drying up of creation\" have little effect. The anger of the deputies is
also fuelled by the conditions of examination of the text: passed in the
Council of Ministers almost two years ago, it arrives in the National
Assembly on Christmas Eve and \"urgently\", which means a single
parliamentary reading. The minister defends himself, reaffirms the
\"balance\" of his text, denounces \"the illusion of everything free\".
He castigates the \"caricatures\" and the \"disinformation\". He denies
wanting to lead a \"repressive crusade\" and cites as proof his solution
of \"graduated response\" to piracy, a progressive chain of warning
emails, registered letters and then fines that should put an end to the
current criminal law. Not so simple: the \"graduated response\" is an
unprecedented legal system, which requires continuous monitoring of
networks and gives power to an administrative authority to impose fines.
It raises serious questions about respect for privacy or the rights of
the defense. In addition, the deputies only discovered the first
versions of the amendment once the debate had begun\... The leader of
the UDF, François Bayou, rushes into the breach by emphatically
criticizing \"an Internet police with exorbitant powers\". Visibly
pleased with his effect, he ends his speech with a tap on his
microphone, which makes an elegant U-turn. Johnny Hallyday in the heat
of the Palais-Bourbon. Wednesday evening, it\'s the final blow. Around
11pm, two identical amendments presented by the UMP\'s Alain Suguenot
and the socialist deputies are studied. They concern the main project of
the opponents of the law: the \"global license\", a legalization of the
exchange of works without commercial purpose, in exchange for a fee of a
few euros taken from the Internet subscription (read opposite). The
happening is at its height: while the UMP rapporteur Christian Vanneste
describes this measure as \"irresponsible\" and \"archaic\", he is
tackled by the UMP\'s Christine Boutin, who does not want a \"race to
the bottom\" to see \"who is the most reactionary\". And affirms that
\"young people, that is to say the France of tomorrow, support this
proposal!\" Phone calls. The opponent of the Pacs is applauded by the
socialist Patrick Bloche, one of the promoters of the Pacs in 1999. At
the time of the vote, the improbable happens: by 30 votes to 28, the
amendment is adopted. The session is interrupted. RDDV\'s entourage
multiplies the phone calls to mobilize the UMP deputies and regain
control. There are still several amendments to vote before the complete
global license project becomes law. The government has several levers to
put out the fire: new deliberation, blocked vote or catch-up in the
Senate. But for RDDV, Christmas is already ruined.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1591

\"Do you want me to summarize the situation for you?\" explains the
socialist Christian Paul, one of the pillars of the parliamentary debate
on copyright. \"Well, nothing will ever be the same again!\" The day
after the surprise vote by the Assembly, against the government\'s
advice, of two amendments paving the way for the legalization of \"P2P\"
(read opposite), the debate resumed at midday in a heated atmosphere. In
the morning, the president of the socialist group, Jean-Marc Ayrault,
requested the postponement of a \"botched, hastily presented\" text,
which he did not consider \"up to the level of such a social issue\". A
message hammered home, as soon as the session resumed, by the PS, but
also by the UDF, who multiplied the reminders of the rules and the
interruptions of the session. \"Cursed\". After yesterday\'s revolt by
UMP deputies (20 out of 30 voted for the two amendments), the group\'s
leader, Bernard Accoyer, tried to calm things down, without disavowing
his troops. Against the advice of the Minister of Culture, who wanted a
new vote on the two \"cursed\" amendments, he stated that there was \"no
question of voting again\", but that a more in-depth examination of the
project would make it possible to realise that the global licence is not
the solution, not to mention that it risks being \"incompatible\" with
European regulations. Not a little proud that the Assembly\'s website
had, according to the deputies, broken its audience records since the
start of the examination of the law, several speakers opposed to the law
multiplied their interventions on the theme: \"Be careful what you say,
thousands of Internet users are watching us live on the Internet.\"
\"There are those who listened to society and the others, isolated in
their government bubble,\" analyzed a UMP deputy, acknowledging that it
is \"not easy to oppose the government in this way.\" After an
interruption, the session resumed at 9:30 p.m. Devoted to the framework
for the use of DRM, or technical measures for the protection of works
provided for in Article 7 (which is at the heart of the transposition of
the European directive legitimizing these digital rights management
tools), the discussion reached the heights of technicality. With at
stake the very sensitive questions of access of free software to these
new markets and the non-patentability of software, on which there is a
broad consensus in France. \"But without interoperability of the
amendments,\" quipped the socialist Patrice Bloche. Very irritated. The
government, which still has 17 articles to vote on plus around 230
amendments, has resigned itself to having to resume examination of the
text in January. Unless Parliament gets involved. It was indeed rumored
that Jean-Louis Debré, very irritated by the state of unpreparedness of
the text, had decided, after having spoken with Bernard Accoyer, to
request the appointment of a fact-finding mission to the Senate and the
Assembly at the beginning of 2006.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1592

\"Do you want me to summarize the situation for you?\" explains the
socialist Christian Paul, one of the pillars of the parliamentary debate
on copyright. \"Well, nothing will ever be the same again!\" The day
after the surprise vote by the Assembly, against the government\'s
advice, of two amendments paving the way for the legalization of \"P2P\"
(read opposite), the debate resumed at midday in a heated atmosphere. In
the morning, the president of the socialist group, Jean-Marc Ayrault,
requested the postponement of a \"botched, hastily presented\" text,
which he did not consider \"up to the level of such a social issue\". A
message hammered home, as soon as the session resumed, by the PS, but
also by the UDF, who multiplied the reminders of the rules and the
interruptions of the session. \"Cursed\". After yesterday\'s revolt by
UMP deputies (20 out of 30 voted for the two amendments), the group\'s
leader, Bernard Accoyer, tried to calm things down, without disavowing
his troops. Against the advice of the Minister of Culture, who wanted a
new vote on the two \"cursed\" amendments, he stated that there was \"no
question of voting again\", but that a more in-depth examination of the
project would make it possible to realise that the global licence is not
the solution, not to mention that it risks being \"incompatible\" with
European regulations. Not a little proud that the Assembly\'s website
had, according to the deputies, broken its audience records since the
start of the examination of the law, several speakers opposed to the law
multiplied their interventions on the theme: \"Be careful what you say,
thousands of Internet users are watching us live on the Internet.\"
\"There are those who listened to society and the others, isolated in
their government bubble,\" analyzed a UMP deputy, acknowledging that it
is \"not easy to oppose the government in this way.\" After an
interruption, the session resumed at 9:30 p.m. Devoted to the framework
for the use of DRM, or technical measures for the protection of works
provided for in Article 7 (which is at the heart of the transposition of
the European directive legitimizing these digital rights management
tools), the discussion reached the heights of technicality. With at
stake the very sensitive questions of access of free software to these
new markets and the non-patentability of software, on which there is a
broad consensus in France. \"But without interoperability of the
amendments,\" quipped the socialist Patrice Bloche. Very irritated. The
government, which still has 17 articles to vote on plus around 230
amendments, has resigned itself to having to resume examination of the
text in January. Unless Parliament gets involved. It was indeed rumored
that Jean-Louis Debré, very irritated by the state of unpreparedness of
the text, had decided, after having spoken with Bernard Accoyer, to
request the appointment of a fact-finding mission to the Senate and the
Assembly at the beginning of 2006.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1593

The debate on copyright and related rights in the information society
was supposed to be rock\'n roll, but it turned out to be downright punk,
with a Minister of Culture, Renaud Donnedieu de Vabres, shaken by the
opposition, but also by part of his majority, during the early stages of
the examination of the law in the National Assembly. From Tuesday and
again yesterday, RDDV played the good faith, castigated \"the illusion
of everything free\" on the Internet, denounced the \"caricatures\", the
\"fantasies\" and the \"disinformation\" on the first major reform of
copyright in France in twenty years. No, it does not want to eliminate
\"private copying\" or the right to \"share one\'s passion\" by
legalizing the DRM (Digital Rights Management) anti-copy systems, the
central axis of this law which aims to curb the duplication of digital
works to curb piracy. No, he is not the minister of the \"repressive
crusade\" against Internet users, because he is proposing an amendment
establishing a \"graduated response\" (warning email, then registered
letter and finally fine) rather than the all-criminal measure in force
until now. But, no more, he is not managing to convince several dozen
deputies of the \"balance\" of a text whose weaknesses are castigated
from the podium. On private copying, it is the UMP deputy from Tarn
Bernard Carayon who denounces a \"text that is unclear, to the point
that the rapporteur had to specify that the number of authorized copies
could not be less than one\". No surprise, because the suppliers of
these technologies, Microsoft in the lead, never stop repeating that DRM
makes the notion of private copying useless. A logic identified by UDF
MP Jean Dionis du Séjour, who is proposing an amendment to organize the
disappearance of the remuneration associated with the right to private
copying, a sum of more than 160 million euros in 2004 collected in the
form of a tax on blank copy media (CDs, cassettes, etc.) and
redistributed to the cultural sector. A proposal that has the
representatives of authors and artists howling. Another recurring
criticism: the \"graduated response\", touted by RDDV as a \"way out\",
appeared in the form of an amendment only the night before last, even
though the bill was passed by the Council of Ministers almost two years
ago. And is the result of \"a very, very difficult birth, with multiple
constraints: procedures, personal data and constitutionality\", as one
of its supporters, lawyer Christian Soulié, acknowledges. Logical,
because the amendment proposes nothing less than the general
surveillance of networks and the creation of an independent authority
ultimately responsible for imposing fines on Internet users. For
François Bayrou, \"it is the creation of an Internet police force with
exorbitant powers, which will have the prerogative to come and control
the private use of our IT tools.\" After a petition that collected more
than 120,000 signatures denouncing in particular the impossibility for
free software to access the technologies of DRM suppliers, the
government seemed to panic a little yesterday. Several companies
including the French Mandriva, one of Microsoft\'s competitors in this
sector, were received in a hurry at Matignon yesterday. And RDDV swore
that a solution would be found. The vote on the more than 240 amendments
was to begin yesterday evening (see box) and continue into the night.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1594

The Maginot Line that the bill on \"copyright and related rights in the
information society\" seeks to establish seems to us to be inconsistent
with France\'s historical positions in this area, unsuitable in light of
new digital practices and technically dangerous. However, from the
outset, the public debate on this topic has been marked by balance. It
was in the wake of the report on the \"petition of dramatic authors\"
presented by Le Chapelier that the National Assembly of January 13, 1791
created copyright, which protected them for five years. But the slayer
of corporatism explains: \"When an author has delivered his work to the
public, when his work is in the hands of everyone, when all educated men
know it, when they have seized the beauties it contains, it seems that,
from that moment on, the author has associated the public with his
property, or rather has transmitted it entirely to them.\" It is in this
same spirit that, thanks to France\'s diplomatic efforts, 148 countries
adopted at UNESCO last month the charter on cultural diversity which
reinforces the special nature of cultural goods. The Minister of Culture
has certainly only inherited a poorly initiated text resulting from a
transposition of a European directive while the administrations have
undergone a long-term work on the part of the lobbyists of the
\"majors\". But the bill presented this week to the Assembly will
perhaps miss a unique opportunity to reconcile the consumer with
copyright, and ultimately weaken cultural diversity by a useless legal
framework intended to protect oligopolies overtaken by technical
progress. Thus, the cultural good which has escaped global and complete
commercialization at UNESCO would fall back into France thanks to this
law\... What are these \"technical protection measures\" (TPM) that the
law will protect? These are secret processes designed to prevent
copying, which can be integrated into the medium of the work or the
reading material (1). MTPs include software associated with the work
that is installed on the user\'s computer before the first consultation
with the aim of preventing or hindering the operation of the computer
and the software enabling copying. MTP also includes the technical
process that requires the reader to connect to a server in which the
work itself is stored, which is thus distributed via the network. The
purchase no longer concerns the work but its consultation, which can be
configured in every way. The use of these techniques obviously requires
those who want to implement them to pay licenses to those who developed
them, hardware manufacturers to restrict the functionality of the
equipment offered to the public and the end user to only use the reader
compatible with MTP. Thus, the entire sale is linked\... Three trusts
Microsoft, RealNetworks, Intertrust (Sony, Philips) are large enough to
impose themselves on this market estimated for the year 2005 at 3.6
billion dollars (2). The European directive lists three rights returning
to creators: distribution rights, communication rights, and the
reproduction right, the only one targeted by the MTPs, which the Member
States must legally protect. However, these MTPs are already protected
by our law, both civil contract, unfair competition, parasitism and
criminal computer fraud, law of conditional access services\... The
insertion of new provisions within the intellectual property code is
therefore useless, as is the assimilation of the circumvention of
technical measures to counterfeiting, liable to disproportionate
sanctions, which is not imposed by the directive. This text proposed
urgently! in Parliament will result in numerous restrictions on use by
colliding two logics: that of the directive, which defines the rights of
the owner of the work, and that of the French intellectual property
code, which defines in a restrictive manner those that belong to the
public\... If the law is passed as it stands, it will be possible to
prosecute for counterfeiting a librarian or an individual who would like
to index the works in his collection and would necessarily have to
bypass MTPs to achieve this! This bill also raises questions in terms of
competition, economic development, research and even\... computer
security and defense! Let us only briefly mention the obstacles placed
in the way of the development of companies and developers of \"free
software\" since they will only have to go and set up in Belgium or any
other country to continue their activity, while the French
administrations already using this software will be responsible for
finding substitute solutions, and the government will have to do without
the substantial savings that could still be made through their use! Let
us pause for a moment to consider the security consequences of this
text. Last month, Sony discontinued the use of its MTP protecting CDs.
The spyware installed without the user\'s knowledge to control the
computer compromised its security to the point that, as soon as this
flaw was announced, a virus exploiting it was distributed by email! Sony
could only announce the recall of all the disks. In addition to the
privacy issues posed by the incriminated MTP, we will therefore question
the security of the computers \"hosting\" MTPs and the computer networks
in which they are inserted. Who will guarantee us tomorrow that, when
viewing a film or concert remotely, intrusion operations will not be
carried out? What are the consequences if the viewing is carried out
from a computer belonging to a sensitive network for the company, for
the administration? We could continue the litany of collateral damage
from this text, both in terms of the possibility for researchers in
certain specialties to continue their work, and the risk of
technological dependence. A missed opportunity, two hundred years after
the contribution of the Enlightenment, to set an example of a law
adapted to the digital economy, rather than promoting the maintenance of
oligopolies apostles of technological obscurantism. This should also
make us think about the opportunity to regulate the action of lobbies in
our democracy, as it is in many countries and at the European
Commission, so that the objective of the law remains the general
interest. For this text, as it stands, the question is asked and the
answer obvious. (1) For example, banning the reading of a DVD on
Saturday evening to \"invite\" the purchaser to go to the cinema! (2)
According to a study by the IDC firm. Bernard CARAYON, UMP MP for Tarn

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1595

Far from being limited to simple anti-copy devices, DRM is also an
economic issue of the highest importance. For software and IT giants
such as Microsoft or Apple, it is in fact the question of control of the
market for the distribution of cultural goods in the era of networks
that is at stake. DRM allows them to impose their control over both the
formats of dematerialized files and the reading software, with the
intention of imposing themselves as essential \"tolls\" with barriers
and licenses as a key. A logic that risks favoring a \"balkanization\"
of networks (the different DRM systems are not compatible with each
other), of strengthening dominant positions such as those of Microsoft
in PCs or Apple in MP3 players, and of excluding free software from this
new market that is already very closed.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1596

Despite the celebrations, activism against the bill is totally
unbridled, boosted of course by the Internet. The site Musique-libre (1)
offers an anti-DRM Mix contest compilation. Quite raw, but with a few
funny refrains, like the falsely folk \"Downloading is illegal;
peer-to-peer is the Axis of Evil\" by the singer Sam. We should also
note the postcards signed by the cartoonist LL de Mars (2): we see in
particular a baby bawling because his lullaby cannot be read due to the
lack of the right unlocking key. The activists of the free software of
eucd.info (2) named after the European directive transposed by the
French text distributed them yesterday morning in front of the Ministry
of Culture, showing a 4.50 m roll with more than 110,000 signatures
demanding the withdrawal of the bill. (1) www.musique-libre.org (2)
www.eucd.info

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1597

In thirteen days, the petition against the copyright bill, initiated by
a consumer group, has been signed by 96,000 people and 600 organizations
and businesses. This group of users of free software and cultural
products intends to submit its petition to the Prime Minister on Monday,
the day before the opening of the debates in the National Assembly. In
the collective\'s sights is a text that imposes a technical lock on all
cultural media, called DRM, to limit the consultation and copying of
works. \"Using the right of quotation or making private copies will be
punishable by a fine of 300,000 euros and three years in prison while
remaining legal practices,\" the group denounces, adding that the vote
on this text \"will prevent librarians from archiving cultural
production, web radios from broadcasting music, journalists and
researchers from using the right of quotation, computer scientists from
developing software and citizens from freely enjoying the goods they
have purchased.\" (AFP)

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1598

On CDs, anti-copy systems prevent duplication, but also the transfer of
a song to a digital music player. On paid download sites, such as
Fnacmusic.com, they limit the number of copies and force the user to
choose approved reading software. Twelve days before the Assembly
examines the bill on copyright, these technological locks called
\"technical protection measures\" or digital rights management systems
(DRM, in the original version) are at the heart of changes in law in the
Internet age. And have sparked an outcry from associations, artists,
librarians and Internet users, who are petitioning left, right and
centre. Logical, because DRMs are at the heart of this text transposing
a European directive, which legitimizes them in law and protects them
legally: the fact of \"jumping\" one of these DRMs, whatever the reason,
will soon be punishable by three years in prison and a fine of 300,000
euros. In theory, no digital circulation of works not validated by the
producers or publishers will be possible anymore. We can measure the
difference with the situation in the \"physical\" universe, where a book
can be bought in a bookstore, but also borrowed, given or photocopied
for personal use. Royalty. \"Our works are pillaged and the technical
measures are a response to the aggression we have suffered,\" justifies
Gilles Bressand, the president of the National Union of Phonogram
Publishers, who recognizes that \"anything that tends to protect the
principal, and therefore the works, can cause secondary damage.\"
Members of the Alliance public-artistes (consumer and artist
associations) see this future law above all as a pledge given to
\"industrialists who want to completely control the circulation of
works\". They propose another solution to put an end to \"the illusion
of free\" while \"allowing the public to benefit from the full potential
of the digital revolution\": the legalization of non-commercial
exchanges of works via the Internet in exchange for a fee on the
subscription to the access provider (1). Librarians and the Association
of Mayors of France are worried about the future of \"public reading\",
according to the Secretary General (PS) of the AMF, André Laignel, with
this \"extraordinarily restrictive\" law which does not provide anything
for libraries to provide access to digital resources. A gift. The
protest was boosted by the timetable: passed by the Council of Ministers
two years ago, the text will be examined on Christmas Eve, December 20.
And \"urgently\", with only one parliamentary reading. A report released
yesterday by an organization dependent on the Ministry of Culture and
dominated by record and film producers, the Higher Council for Literary
and Artistic Property (CSPLA), has further heated up tempers. It
recommends amendments imposing DRM on file-sharing software, and even on
web radios (see opposite). These price increases have aroused the ire of
free software designers, whose petition (1) against \"the generalized
locking of culture\" has collected more than 30,000 signatures in less
than a week. They see this as a gift to the suppliers of these control
technologies, including Microsoft. (1) www.lalliance.org and
http://eucd.info

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1599

After the United States on November 22 and before Japan on December 10,
Microsoft launched its new video game console, the Xbox 360, in Europe
on Friday, December 2 (Le Monde, November 29, 2005). The world\'s number
one software company, which started from scratch in this sector four
years ago, with no experience in mass production of hardware, and a
brand image that is the opposite of the leisure world, has paid a high
price for its years of learning. According to analysts, it has invested
more than \$10 billion at a loss since 2000. For a mixed result: its
Xbox, which arrived in November 2001, a year later than Sony\'s PS2,
only obtained a 20% market share, very far from Sony\'s 60% and barely
above Nintendo. By arriving early this time (Sony\'s PS3 and Nintendo\'s
Revolution are not expected until spring 2006), with lower prices and a
more extensive games catalog than its predecessor, Microsoft expects to
sell 6 million Xbox 360s within seven months and, eventually, capture at
least 40% of the market. If Bill Gates\' firm is so determined to
establish itself in video games, it is certainly to take advantage of
the strong growth of this market, but it is above all because it is
preparing for the post-PC era. Indeed, the computer, over which
Microsoft reigns supreme, could be the big loser in the vast convergence
at work since the advent of digital technologies. In the battle to
become the universal digital entertainment machine (storage, management,
downloading and exchange of photos, videos, music, messaging, surfing
the Web, etc.), reigning supreme in every living room, the new
sophisticated game consoles or the latest multifunctional
Internet-telephony-voice decoders have as much legitimacy as the \"media
center\" PCs offered, among others, by Microsoft. Beyond the home, it is
also possible, everywhere and all the time, to continue to entertain
oneself and connect thanks to the new generation mobile phones (3G),
which have become real pocket entertainment machines. However, there is
also in this protean competition between players in IT, consumer
electronics, telecommunications, media and games, some good news for
Microsoft: to become \"intelligent\", all these new devices integrate
more and more software. This is why the Seattle behemoth has been
trying, for a decade, to extend its empire to other devices than the PC.
With, as in video games, fairly mediocre results compared to the
colossal financial effort made. Thus, Microsoft, which has long bet on
the emergence of a vast interactive television market, must today be
content with being the supplier of software for the decoders of a few
television operators via broadband, a much narrower market. In mobile
telephony, the market for \"smartphones\" - these handsets integrating
calendar, address book and email functions - is indeed exploding but
Microsoft is struggling to break through against the sector leader
Nokia. The latter formed a consortium with other mobile manufacturers to
develop an operating system, Symbian, which equips more than 60% of
smartphones compared to less than 20% for Microsoft\'s software. Above
all, in this year 2005 when it celebrates its 30th anniversary, Bill
Gates\' firm has taken a \"hit\", even if it remains one of the richest
and most profitable in the world. Already under attack from free (and
largely free) Linux software, especially in emerging countries,
Microsoft risks being challenged in its core business by Internet giants
such as Yahoo! and especially Google. Just as it had \"made obsolete\"
IBM in the 1980s. These portals want to become providers of \"software
services\": the services (word processing, spreadsheets, messaging,
search engines, comparison tools, but also music, photo, video file
management, etc.) would be accessible online, free of charge or by
subscription, instead of being purchased and stored on computers. More
flexible in use, no longer requiring very powerful machines or
cumbersome update procedures, this software is accessible from any
connected device and allows Microsoft to bypass it. A real danger for
this company that draws all its power from its monopoly on basic
software, which equips almost all computers on the planet. Even though
Microsoft has known in the past, by taking advantage of its financial
strength, how to buy or crush other competitors, such as Apple or
Netscape, Google\'s aura worries it. To the point that, on November 6,
it announced that it wanted to launch \"live\" versions of Windows and
Office in 2006, accessible in particular from its MSN portal. A
defensive move, which also forces it to cut its prices.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1600

It was barely ten years ago that at the Université du Québec à Montréal
(UQAM), computer science broke away from mathematics to become a
department in its own right. Today, there are some 45 professors, some
of whom are internationally renowned, and more than 1,500 students. The
computer science department is probably the largest in Canada, perhaps
except for that of the University of Ottawa. It also stands out for its
desire to stay in touch with the job market, its avant-garde nature and
the many partnerships it has established. A bridge \"Many students leave
other universities to come to us because we have developed a close
relationship with the job market,\" says Abdel Obaïd, director of the
department. For example, we have courses accredited by Cisco. With this
company, we have developed solutions for network management.\" In 2003,
Professor Étienne Gagnon made improvements to the SABLECC compiler of
compilers, which is now used around the world. The department has also
developed technologies in conjunction with Bell Canada and Ericsson.
\"Some bachelor\'s degrees, such as the microelectronics engineering
degree, are designed to meet the demands of industry, particularly in
Montreal. We do several internships in the telecommunications and
aeronautics sectors. Four people work full-time in the Internship
Office, which has established links with hundreds of companies in North
America, Asia, etc. We have also established links with other
universities, in China, Lebanon and Europe for example, where our
professors sometimes teach. Many students, especially in the graduate
and doctoral programs, come from outside Quebec to take advantage of
UQAM\'s teaching methods and cutting-edge computer equipment.\"
Innovation and pedagogy The unparalleled dynamism of UQAM\'s computer
science department is certainly not unrelated to its ability to
establish such diverse partnerships with leading players in the private
and institutional sectors. Bachelor\'s, doctorate or master\'s degrees,
the institution offers more than 11 programs, not counting
specializations, covering all aspects of computer science. \"Started in
2000,\" recalls Dr. Obaïd, \"our doctorate in cognitive computer science
is an almost unique program in North America, a junction between
computer science and the human sciences \[psychology, linguistics,
etc.\].\" This program focuses on modeling knowledge acquisition, with a
view to using it in distance learning - we have obviously forged ties
with TELUQ for the occasion - artificial intelligence and improving
learning tools. Also brand new, the microelectronics engineering program
is the only one of its kind in Canada and in the entire French-speaking
world. This bachelor\'s degree currently has a cohort of 60 students and
demand is high. Next year, the Canadian Accreditation Board should
approve the acceptance of its graduates by the Order of Engineers. The
specialized graduate diploma (DESS) in bioinformatics meets the growing
needs in biotechnology around the world. It is intended for bachelor\'s
degrees in computer science, mathematics, biology and biochemistry. In
this three-term program, subsidized by Genome Canada and Genome Quebec,
new approaches and analytical methods are developed to process and
manage, for example in the pharmaceutical field, a plethora of
biological data. On the job market, personnel needs have been identified
in the basic research sector, of course, but also in the oil, food,
forestry and agricultural industries. \"We have experienced professors
in this DESS, several of whom, like Anne Bergeron, have an international
reputation,\" says Mr. Obaïd. At the end of their training, students
have the opportunity to complete an internship in a biotechnology
company or laboratory in the Montreal area. A broad research horizon The
research activities in the Computer Science Department are grouped
around five main areas: systems computing, theoretical and combinatorial
computing, artificial intelligence, teleinformatics and software
engineering. This research is developed within the framework of
laboratories such as LATECE (Research Laboratory on Electronic Commerce
Technologies), which brings together some fifty members from backgrounds
as diverse as electrical engineering and urban and tourism studies. In
particular, work is being done on the development of virtual private
networks, designed for companies that collaborate regularly, and on open
source software, which is in high demand in the institutional field.
Founded in 1996 by Professor Omar Cherkaoui, the teleinformatics
laboratory welcomes doctoral and master\'s students as well as interns.
Its objective is research on advanced network management and multimedia
applications superimposed on IP networks (platform modeling). They are
also working on fiber optic architecture and building an ontology
prototype for wireless telecommunications between computers. The lab has
received several grants from telecommunications giants like Bell,
Ericsson, Nortel and AT&T. It is responsible for several innovations
such as tools for assessing quality of service in networks and the
object-oriented implementation of the SNMP-v3 protocol. The computer
science department is located in the brand new Science Complex, north of
Place des Arts. Named the Pierre-Dansereau Science Complex of UQAM, the
campus includes, among other things, the biological sciences pavilion
(which will be inaugurated on November 28), the science library, the
Montreal offices of TELUQ and student residences. Contributor to Le
Devoir

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1601

As podcasting progresses and comes out of the shadows, one might wonder
if its appearance in the open will not mean the end of free podcast
downloads. Because as Simon-Pierre Gourd, professor of sound creation at
the new UQAM School of Media, explains, podcasting has solid origins in
nomadic and alternative culture, as well as in the philosophy of free
software. The commercial aspect therefore seems very difficult to
reconcile at first glance. \"What people don\'t want is to have things
imposed on them,\" he reminds us. Which leads him to believe that even
if podcasts will soon become available for purchase, it will not be
possible at any price. And it is difficult to predict how the operation
will materialize. Mr. Gourd sees shows downloaded for \$0.99, as is the
case for songs on the Apple Music Store, or even the addition of
targeted advertising to the content. One thing is certain, he believes
that the rate and the process will have to be fair so as not to offend
the enthusiasm of fans. For his part, Sylvain Langlois, vice-president
and general manager of Astral Media Radio Interactif believes that the
only possible business model is through advertising. His suggestion?
\"Visuals on the player\'s screen while listening or a text at the
beginning of the broadcast. Because I don\'t think listeners will be
ready to pay. They will prefer it to be free, even if it means putting
up with advertising.\" In any case, major media outlets know that this
generosity in content is not without repercussions for them. Which
probably explains why it is taking a long time to see paid downloads
appear. In the opinion of James Selfe, head of promotion, Radio
Communications at Radio-Canada\'s first channel, podcasting has the
power to increase listener loyalty to the media and its products. And
that, for both public and private broadcasters, is sweet music to their
ears. Tools to enjoy podcasts -A computer with Internet access (high
speed) -Download software (for example: iPodder, iTunes, Win Amp,
Musicmatch or Windows Media Player) -A digital music player is required
to get going because otherwise, you will be forced to listen to your
episodes on your computer. Note that despite its name, podcasting does
not necessarily require the use of an Apple iPod. Several other players
can do the trick, although the manufacturer of the famous device has
fully integrated the management of this type of downloads since iTunes
4.9. -All that remains is to explore the Web in search of auditory
treasures! JSMassicotte@lesoleil.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1602

To put an end to the high volatility of copyrighted files circulating on
the Internet, digital content producers and software manufacturers are
seeking to generalize DRM (Digital Rights Management) systems. These
technical devices make it possible to limit the number of copies and to
tightly control the use made of files acquired from download platforms.
Some players in the industrial world do not hide their desire to see
such devices integrated into all communicating software. Several weeks
before the bill on copyright in the information society is examined by
Parliament, a draft amendment to the text is circulating \"according to
which any program publisher who has not taken measures to, in the state
of the art, protect works and objects against unauthorized use\" could
be prosecuted\... for counterfeiting. \"The major achievement of the
European directive on copyright \[which the law proposes to transpose
into French law\] is the legal protection of technical anti-copy
measures,\" is acknowledged by the Brussels Commission. For rights
holders, the interest is to curb the piracy of cultural works, carried
out using peer-to-peer (P2P) exchange networks: if the original file is
protected by DRM, its successive uses can be tracked. But for software
giants, the interest is quite different. For Microsoft and Apple, it is
a question of increasing their control over computer file formats and
reading software tools. And also, of excluding free or non-commercial
software from the field of competition. Currently, DRM devices are based
only on computer programs attached to mobile files. But they could, in
the short term, be directly integrated into the chips that equip
individual computers. The principle is simple. When sold or exchanged on
a download platform, the music or video file is encrypted. A second
file - called a license file - is stored locally, on the user\'s hard
drive. When a reading software tries to access the music file, it
automatically calls the license file which contains the ad hoc
cryptographic key, necessary to read the work. It is, in particular, the
license file which determines the number of copies that a user is
authorized to make of the file he has acquired. \"This is an inversion
of the logic of cryptographic exchanges, warns Christophe Espern, one of
the facilitators of the FreeSoftwareFoundation (FSF), an association
opposed to the generalization of DRM. In a classic cryptographic
exchange, the keys are made available to the user. In the case of DRM,
the keys are hidden on the hard drive and only the reading software can
access them.\" A particularity which implies that only \"trusted
software\" can access certain content protected by DRM devices. This
detail is important. \"This de facto excludes open-source \[free\]
software from the competition, since its fundamental principle is to be
developed in complete transparency,\" says Mr. Espern. \"No free
software can read content protected by DRM.\" The sometimes occult
nature of DRM systems is at the center of controversy in the world of
computer security specialists. At the end of October, antivirus software
publishers detected the presence of a small program on CDs published by
Sony-BMG, installing itself without the user\'s knowledge on the hard
drive of their PC. Several antivirus software publishers have decided to
classify this small program, called a rootkit, in the category of
spyware\... The new generations of hardware, in the wake of Microsoft\'s
future operating system - Windows Vista, scheduled to be marketed in
2006 - will integrate systems that will strengthen existing anti-copy
protection. The future Windows will in fact include a module that will
only authorize access to certain areas of the computer\'s memory to
software - including device drivers - that is \"signed\", i.e.
recognized as \"trustworthy\" by a certification authority such as, for
example, the American company Verisign. Software will therefore have to
go through a remote server to obtain authorization to access these
protected areas where, for example, files protected by copyright could
be stored. The possibility of circumventing DRM would then be almost
zero. One of the last flaws in any digital content protection system,
called by specialists the \"analog hole\", could also be in the process
of being filled. It is in fact still possible to re-record and encode in
digital format the music that comes out of the speakers of a personal
computer. But \"in the United States\", specifies Mr. Espern, systems
are already being tested that make it impossible to convert analog
streams into digital files\".

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1603

ECONOMY OF ARTISTIC PROPERTY, by Xavier Greffe (2005, Economica, 209 p.,
18 ). THE NEW COPYRIGHT AND RELATED RIGHTS, by Alain Berenboom (2005,
Larcier-De Boeck, 512 p., 110 ). COPYRIGHT AND PROTECTION OF WORKS IN
THE DIGITAL UNIVERSE, by Séverine Dussollier (2005, Larcier, 582 p., 128
). TEXT OF THE PROJECT: www.assemblee-nationale.fr/
12/dossiers/031206.asp FOUNDATION FOR FREE SOFTWARE, http://eucd.info

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1604

Developing countries would like, this time, not to miss the next
industrial revolution, which will be that of information technology. The
task promises to be difficult, given how far we are starting from.
However, for a rare time, they seem to be able to count on the help of
large multinationals and the laws of the market. Immediately nicknamed
\"the green machine\" after its unveiling last week at the World Summit
on the Information Society in Tunis, the small lime green laptop almost
brought a tear to the UN Secretary-General\'s eye, so beautiful is its
adventure. \"It is truly a moving experience. It is also a touching
expression of global solidarity and \[an example\] of corporate
citizenship,\" exclaimed Kofi Annan in front of the device designed
especially for children in the poorest countries on the planet by the
engineer from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and father of
the \"one laptop per child\" project, Nicholas Negroponte. No bigger
than a school book, the machine is a real computer with a small
color/black and white screen and a keyboard, all running on flash memory
and embedded in a rubber shell to ensure better shock resistance. Its
power cable also serves as a shoulder strap. It has a pretty yellow
crank that is used to recharge its battery in the event of a power
outage, at a rate of one minute of crank turns for 40 minutes of use. It
can easily be transformed into a television or an electronic game. It
includes free software and runs on a free-source operating system
(Linux) that will allow its users to easily develop their own software.
It was designed to work on a network so that, for example, an entire
class can work together or benefit from a single Internet connection. Oh
yes! This little marvel should only cost \$100 US. Sponsored by industry
giants such as Google, AMD, News Corp and Red Hat, it will initially be
sold only to governments in developing countries so that they can give
it directly to their millions of schoolchildren. Its distribution should
begin by the end of 2006 in six countries, two in Africa, two in Asia
and two in Latin America. The little green machine may not be the only
low-cost computer available in the coming months. The American SolarPC
should release a computer at the same price, but without a screen, by
the end of the year. AMD is working on an Internet box at \$249, the
Taiwanese manufacturer VIA launched a personal computer in June sold for
\$250 and the Indian Encore Software presented prototypes that would
cost \$230. We are seeing the same phenomenon in wireless telephony
where the American Motorola has just been chosen by a consortium of 650
operators to design mobiles costing less than \$30. Dutch Philips, for
its part, promises to make models half as expensive by 2008. Finnish
Nokia has instead chosen to tackle service costs and has set itself the
goal of a monthly price of less than \$6 per device. It is easy to guess
that this race for low prices is generally less about altruism than
about business sense. While the computer market is stagnating in
developed countries, growth prospects are spectacular in the emerging
economies of China, India and Brazil. The number of personal computer
users in developing countries is expected to increase from 660 million
to one billion within five years. In wireless telephony, it is expected
to be able to gain one billion new users during the same period in these
countries, which will account for 80% of global growth in subscriptions.
The companies know that they could do much better still provided that
the cost of these technologies is reduced. A shortcut to development?
Whatever the reasons, this trend is good news in a world where, like the
Tunis Summit, there is an attempt to reduce the \"digital divide\"
between the North and the South. Often poor, if not totally devoid of
traditional telecommunications infrastructure, even simple telephone
wires, could not developing countries hope to skip this stage and move
directly to the new economy thanks to cellular telephony and digital
technology? Their under-equipment and the youth of their populations
could, according to experts, paradoxically constitute an advantage
because they make them virgin territories where new information
technologies can be rapidly deployed. It has been calculated, for
example, that each time the number of mobile phones increases by 10
devices per 100 inhabitants, the GDP itself increases by 0.6%. It is
also reported that these devices now allow African and Chinese farmers
to obtain direct information on market prices and to be less cheated by
intermediaries when it comes to selling their crops. What these
statistics do not say, however, is that the digital revolution in the
countries of the South is concentrated mainly in emerging economies and
large cities, leaving behind rural areas and the poorest populations.
Nor do they say that if it is mainly the cell phone that is successful
among these populations, it is partly because one does not have to know
how to read or count to be able to use it. And they do not talk about
the spying on these communications by dictators. What is also not said
is that the first experiment in a computer for the poor, called Simputer
and developed by the Indian Institute of Science, was a dismal
commercial failure. As for the little green machine that we dream of
seeing millions of schoolchildren in poor countries around the world
ride around with today, its creators admit that one of the problems will
be to dissuade the families of its small owners, whose annual income is
sometimes as low as \$1,000 a year, from selling it immediately to make
ends meet.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1605

Angel Gonzalez-Sanz is an economist at the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development (UNCTAD). He is co-author of the 2005 report on
the information economy and electronic commerce published on the
occasion of the World Summit on the Information Society. Is it not
ridiculous to want to bridge the \"digital divide\" when many people in
the South have problems accessing water, health or education? The
countries of the South must become aware of the importance of new
information technologies in solving these fundamental problems. Nearly
half of the world\'s Internet users live and work in the countries of
the South. This therefore has a significant social and economic impact
on them. Technology must be a tool to solve development problems more
effectively, particularly in relation to trade since that is our
mission. There are already several examples of success, even if they are
on a limited scale: in the tea and coffee markets, for example, some
small producers have found niche markets in developed countries thanks
to the Internet, and they have appropriated more added value by avoiding
certain intermediaries. Similarly, in the tourism sector, developing
countries can appropriate a greater share of the added value by ousting
certain intermediaries. This is the case in Cambodia: the main agencies
in the United States do almost no promotion of this destination and
concentrate their offer on a few hotels. In Angkor, a small hotel with
22 rooms opened a website in June and, since then, has already generated
70% of its turnover directly through online bookings. How is the
\"digital divide\" characterized? There is much talk of the digital
divide between the North and the South, which is real: 3% of Africans
have access to the Internet, compared to 62% in North America. But there
are also South-South divides linked to the very great inequalities that
affect developing countries. A gap exists between the elites and the
vast mass of the population, another between urban and rural areas.
Similarly, new information technologies cover very varied fields: the
situation of mobile phones is much more favorable than that of the
Internet. But if we know the rate of access or equipment, we lack
information on the way people use technologies, which is fundamental to
support and evaluate policies. And the uses can be very different from
those in the North: if, in developed countries, mobile telephony is a
very personal tool, in developing countries it has an enormous impact on
the activity of microenterprises. In Egypt, 85% of them, from taxi
drivers to painters, now depend on mobile phones, whereas before they
had no means of communication. What are the obstacles to attempts to
resolve this divide? Lack of access and equipment, and high prices, of
course. But also professional qualification or illiteracy: the Internet
remains largely text-based. The \$100 computer is therefore not the
immediate solution for the poorest, who live on \$2 a day. But the idea
remains interesting. A similar project has appeared in India, with the
Simputer. Many developing countries seem to choose free software, such
as Linux, which can be copied and modified at will, rather than
Microsoft\'s. Is it because of its lower cost? Free software is very
interesting for developing countries. Not only because of its cost, but
also because it allows the emergence of a local industry for adapting
the tool, for translation, for services, all things allowed without
limit by this type of software. It also allows South-South cooperation
to be initiated, without depending on companies in the North. Brazil,
for example, has developed the use of free software significantly, and
we have just signed an agreement to reproduce their experience in other
countries\...

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1606

Tunis, special envoy. It is green, its crank is yellow, and, from a
distance, it looks more like a toy. The look is no coincidence: this
object was designed for children. Christened the \"green machine\" by
its designers because of its color, this \$100 computer is without a
doubt the most concrete response provided at the Summit on the
Information Society in Tunis to the North-South \"digital divide\" that
was at the center of the debates and the very origin of the summit.
Presented as a preview by a team of researchers from the famous Media
Lab of MIT (Massachusetts Institute of Technology) in Boston, in the
United States, the first and only prototype of this machine presented as
\"indestructible\" was unveiled last Wednesday by Nicholas Negroponte,
father of the project and director of the Media Lab, before the
astonished eyes of UN Secretary General Kofi Annan. \"We have long
dreamed of a low-cost computer,\" Annan said as he discovered the
undisputed star of the WSIS. \"Today, we have an impressive technical
result.\" Described as a \"technological shortcut\" for poor countries,
this low-cost laptop is not a cheap computer. The size of a school
textbook, the PC with a color screen is equipped with a 500 megahertz
microprocessor. It connects to the Internet in \"wifi mesh\" mode and
can even act as a television or e-book (digital book) with a screen on
one side and a keyboard on the other. Only the data storage capacity in
flash memory, reduced to half a gigabit, distinguishes it from an
ordinary desktop computer. Equipped with four USB ports, it has the
immense advantage of being able to be powered in all possible ways:
electric current, simple batteries or using the small crank on the right
side of the keyboard, which operates a dynamo. With astonishing results:
when turned for one minute, it gives ten minutes of autonomy if the
computer is on. In \"e-book\" mode, closed, \"one minute of transmission
can power the computer for nearly thirty minutes\", explains the very
calm Professor Negroponte. He is certain that he has here \"the project
of his life\". Access to knowledge The fact is that the \$100 computer
is anything but a commercial enterprise. Developed within the Media Lab,
the project is supported by a non-profit association \"One Laptop per
Child\" (OLPC, according to the acronym for the English One Laptop per
Child), founded by Negroponte in the company of other big names in new
technologies such as Alan Kay, the man who, in 1968, had developed the
first laptop. This NGO of inventors has set the bar very high. Its
ambition is to eventually provide every child on the planet with a
laptop from the age of 7-8, with absolute priority given to poor
countries. It is intended to be a weapon against the \"educational
divide,\" explains Negroponte, who has long supported the creation of
schools in Cambodia. \"Digital technology is just another means of
providing access to knowledge and learning,\" he recalls. The OLPC
program plans a very rapid ramp-up: five to ten million units could be
produced before the end of 2006, up to ten times more by the end of
2007. \"A computer per child\" could of course have chosen to recycle
second-hand computers from rich countries to distribute them in poor
countries. But according to the Media Lab\'s calculations, if we
consider that each PC to be reconditioned before new use requires one
hour of work, it would take 45,000 years of work time to update 100
million machines. Too long to get the South out of its digital
underdevelopment. Another bias of the (100% American) MIT team:
individual ownership of the computer. \"We\'re not thinking of community
pens,\" explains the Media Lab on its website. \"Every child should have
their own. They are tools for thinking, cheap enough to be used for work
and play, drawing, writing or doing mathematics. A computer can be the
same thing, but much more powerful.\" While collective uses of the
\"green machine\" are not excluded, Negroponte also believes, as a good
American, in the virtues of private property. \"Experience shows that we
take care of what belongs to us,\" he says. \"Have you ever washed a
rental car?\" From the production of the \$100 PC to its final
distribution through states and then schools, a Marshall Plan to bridge
the digital divide remains a monstrous puzzle. It will first be
necessary to hold the psychological barrier of \$100, in order to
accelerate the diffusion of the object. The MIT computer is not in fact
the first in the niche of very low-cost PCs designed for emerging
markets. But it will be the least expensive: the few models released to
date, or about to be released, in Taiwan, India or the United States,
all cost between 200 and 250 dollars. To arrive at such a low price (the
first \"classic\" PC offers are at 500 dollars), the Media Lab team,
during the year that it took to develop its prototype, worked on the
smallest detail: it took 200 drawings of the model and three months of
work on the flat and flexible screen, the biggest difficulty, to arrive
at a unit cost of 35 dollars. All the while taking care to make it
readable in the open air, since many classes in the Third World take
place outdoors. And by designing an operating system (from free software
based on Linux) \"non-obese\", that is to say reduced to the essentials
in order to save on energy consumption. The \$1 million to \$2 million
project was funded largely by sponsors like Google, chipmaker AMD and
Rupert Murdoch\'s News Corporation. The other big money-saver is the
lack of any investment in the machine other than technical, says Mary
Lou Jepsen, who developed the display. \"About 75 percent of the cost of
a computer is marketing, distribution and operating system licensing,\"
she says. \"In our case, those expenses were cut to zero.\" To keep
costs down, states that want to buy the \$100 PC and distribute it free
to their schools will have to order large enough quantities. Eyeing a
potentially huge market, the manufacturers are already in advanced
negotiations with five companies in Asia to start production in February
2006, and will set a price that is lower the more millions of units are
produced. According to OLPC, which estimates the minimum order for the
project to be economically viable at 500,000 to one million computers,
the first list of potential \"buyer\" countries includes Brazil,
Thailand, Egypt, Argentina, India and China. \"China alone wants three
million right away,\" announced Mary Lou Jepsen. \"And Brazil has
already blocked its line of credit. It\'s beyond anything we could have
imagined.\" \"At that price, we are ready to buy thousands, even
millions,\" enthused Senegalese President Abdoulaye Wade in Tunis. Rich
countries are not left out: the state of Massachusetts in the United
States has ordered 500,000 for its schoolchildren. For reasons of scale,
OLPC, which has asked the UN to provide the logistics for the project,
wants to serve first the large countries that would order at least one
million computers. The launch in small countries will take between six
months and a year. But there is no shortage of grey areas regarding the
financing of the operation, particularly for the poorest countries,
unable to pay the sums envisaged. Like the beginnings of the Internet,
\"Solutions exist,\" assures the director of the Media Lab, who imagines
that States, which spend on average 20 dollars per year and per student
on school books, could devote part of this sum to the purchase of
machines if these include digital manuals replacing books. The case of
Africa, they recognize at OLPC, is the most problematic and could
require \"sponsorship of children in the South by those in the North.\"
There remains a real unknown: connections to the Internet network. In
this complex puzzle, they represent another challenge. Thanks to the
mesh, a Wi-Fi chip that allows computers to be connected to each other
in the same geographical area, even without an Internet connection,
local networks can be created, allowing the exchange of royalty-free
content. \"We can imagine that a single connected computer will allow
hundreds of others to be irrigated,\" explains Mary Lou Jepsen,
according to whom the capacities of the new networks will allow an
exponential development of \"connectivity\" on a global scale. The most
important thing, the Boston researchers point out to all their
interlocutors, is to believe in the dynamics of the project. \"It\'s a
bit like the beginnings of the Internet,\" says Mary Lou Jepsen, present
at her stand in Tunis twelve hours a day to answer questions from
participants at the summit. \"It seems a bit anarchic, chaotic, but the
technological contagion around the \$100 computer is such that, for us,
all hope is allowed today.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1607

At the World Summit on the Information Society (November 16-18 in
Tunis), the main topic of conflict is the \"governance\" of the
Internet. And it pits the United States against the rest of the world.
The vast majority of countries want America to share the power to define
the standards and rules for the operation of the Web, or even transfer
it to the United Nations. But the American Department of Commerce has
announced that it will not give up (read below). Washington warns
democratic states against a possible rise in power of dictatorships
which, if control of the Internet were transferred to an international
organization, would have new means to curb freedom of expression in
their countries. The United States also says it fears a takeover of the
Network by incompetent international \"bureaucrats.\" The fact remains
that today their technological supremacy gives them a preponderant role.
If the Internet exists as a unified global network, it is thanks to the
ongoing work of engineering committees that establish global standards
in all areas. The two main bodies, the Internet Architecture Board (IAB)
and the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), are composed mainly of
American and Scandinavian experts working for large American companies
and universities. They are overseen by the Internet Society, based in
Washington and Geneva, an association in which American members play a
leading role. The development of technical recommendations for the World
Wide Web is ensured by the W3C, an international organization based at
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in Boston. Above all,
the Internet is a set of machines: in the world, 80% of routers - the
computers that calculate the best route for data to take to transit the
Network - are manufactured by Cisco, a company in San Jose (California).
The other 20% come from its competitor, Juniper, based in Sunnyvale, a
quarter of an hour away. To surf the Web, Internet users use the same
browsers: Microsoft Explorer, Netscape Navigator or Apple Safari - all
American. The rebellious spirits use the free software Firefox, from the
Californian cooperative company Mozilla. To find information, in any
language and in any field, everyone uses the American search engines
Google or Yahoo! first. To exchange electronic mail, listen to and
download music, watch videos or create weblogs, the vast majority of
available products come from the United States. Instant messaging is
dominated by Yahoo!, MSN (Microsoft Network) and AOL (America Online).
As for Skype, the free telephone system using the Network invented by
Scandinavians, it has just been bought by the Californian auction site
eBay. Finally, American e-commerce, marketing and online advertising
companies dominate the markets of most countries. This power is also
exercised at a less visible but equally strategic level. The Internet is
governed by a nebula of public and private organizations created over
the years by American researchers and academics. To be connected to the
Internet, every computer must have an IP (Internet Protocol) address.
Each number must be unique, otherwise the coherence of the system on a
global scale would be broken. Coordination is ensured by ICANN (Internet
Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers), created in 1998 to replace
the artisanal system installed twenty years earlier by the University of
Southern California. ICANN is a hybrid institution. Its members are
public and private organizations from all over the world, and its board
of directors welcomes nationals from eighteen countries. But, legally,
it is a private association under Californian law, under the supervision
of the American Federal Department of Commerce. One of its branches,
IANA (Internet Assigned Numbers Authority), periodically creates series
of IP addresses and then distributes them to five organizations,
corresponding to each continent. In turn, these assign them to users in
their zone. Another major mission of ICANN: to manage domain names. In
addition to its IP address, each server has a name - cocacola.com or
lemonde.fr - which allows access to the desired site without having to
memorize the address. These names have acquired great commercial and
symbolic value. The system is managed by a network of thirteen root
servers, both directories and switchboards. Seven are installed in the
United States. The two main domains \".com\" and \".net\", created for
American users but used throughout the world, are administered for ICANN
by VeriSign, a private company under contract to the American Department
of Commerce. It manages more than 40 million names and ensures the
operation of two root servers, including the standard server, the model
for all the others. ICANN also exercises control over national domains,
such as \".fr\" for France. States and territories wishing to create a
new one or change one must submit a request to ICANN, which generally
takes several years to process. East Timor (Timor-Leste), independent
since 2002, only obtained activation of the \".tl\" this year. For its
part, the European Union negotiated at length with ICANN to create a
\".eu\", then waited for it to be introduced into the root servers. The
\".eu\" will not work until 2006. ICANN must also give its agreement
when a country wishes to transfer management of its domain from one
organization to another. In 2005, this was the case for five states,
including Iraq. On the other hand, the \".kp\" domain, created for North
Korea, is not active, because ICANN has never assigned it to a national
organization. Finally, ICANN is responsible for creating sector-specific
domains, such as \".museum\" for museums or \".travel\" for travel
agencies. It had planned to create a \".xxx\" for pornographic sites,
but gave up on this at the behest of Washington\...

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1608

Until Sunday, free software enthusiasts will be introducing you to their
world, all over Quebec. On the theme \"Let\'s connect people\", you will
be able to attend conferences, demonstrations, interventions in schools
and other activities intended to promote free software (open access).
Remember that this quality software, designed by volunteers and
distributed free of charge, has the same functions as paid software from
major brands like Microsoft or Adobe. Their only flaw is their sometimes
difficult installation process. And precisely, the general public will
be able to take advantage of a free service on Saturday in Montreal,
Laval and Quebec City: you bring your computer, and professionals will
install the Linux system, the Office office suite or other free software
for you. Beginners are welcome; take advantage of it! Information and
program: www.sqil.info THE ANNIVERSARY November 17, 1970: Doug Engelbart
files the patent for the mouse Invented by Doug Engelbart of Stanford
University, the first mouse was made of a wooden shell and two metal
wheels to move a point on the horizontal and vertical axes of a screen.
As you probably guessed, Engelbart nicknamed his invention \"mouse\"
because of the wire that dangled, and still dangles, at its end. It was
used to use a graphical interface called \"Windows\", also created by
this researcher. Unfortunately for him, software could not be patented
at that time\... We also owe to this computer pioneer the concepts of
hypertext (i.e. links between Web pages) as well as videoconferencing.
THE QUOTE From this day forward, I will not spend another penny on
content that I cannot use the way I want. If I can\'t copy it to my hard
drive, and play it on my favorite music player whenever and wherever I
want, then I won\'t buy it. They can all take their protection systems
and stick them in their bottom line. - Mike Evangelist, former Apple
marketing director, on the new copy protection systems built into music
and movies that impose usage restrictions on consumers. Source:
writersblocklive.com THE TECH WORD TO PLUG KILLER APP \"This GPS
pacifier will be the Killer App for moms!\" Great lovers of war
metaphors, the marketing strategists of technology companies have dubbed
\"killer applications\" those flagship technologies that everyone dreams
about every night: Apple\'s iPod, Google\'s search engine, Sony\'s
Playstation\... \"Flagship applications\" (official translation) are
particularly decisive in the technology market, where due to
compatibility issues, you have to impose your standard or die. Send us
your suggestions for tech words (English or French) to
actuel@lapresse.ca. E-ETHICS The eight email faux pas 1- Writing on the
spur of the moment. 2- Being sarcasm that won\'t come across in writing.
3- WRITE IN CAPITAL LETTERS. 4- Overusing exclamation points!!! 5-
Pressing \"send\" before proofreading. 6- Forgetting to attach the
expected document. 7- Writing to a client with a Hotmail or Yahoo
address. 8- Writing while drunk. Source: taken from e-mail mistakes that
make you look bad, according to technology columnist Kim Komando. The
eighth mistake is ours (unfortunately\...).

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1609

There were low-cost flights, now there are simplified \"low-tech\"
computers. While computer manufacturers around the world are constantly
boasting about the sacrosanct \"use value\" of their products by
highlighting their increasingly extensive possibilities, a small French
SME has decided to break with the logic of \"always more\" high-tech.
Developed by a Parisian SME created in 2002 by three students, the
Ordissimo is a computer that does not seek to do everything but to offer
a use adapted to a clientele of ignoramuses wishing to get up to date
with technology without spending sleepless nights. \"Many people do not
get into computers for fear of being seen as idiots,\" explains
Christophe Berly, one of the fathers of the Ordissimo, \"we help them
take this step with a machine that is not cheap but limited to basic
uses. It is aimed at seniors of course, but more broadly at anyone who
wants to simplify their relationship with the computer.\" With its
almost instinctive mode of operation, close to writing, Ordissimo calls
a spade a spade. To send an e-mail, simply click on the e-mail icon and
fill in the window that appears on the screen. The same operation is
used to write a text, by pressing the text icon. If the graphic
interface has been simplified and reduced to essential uses (writing,
connecting to the Internet, calculating, looking at photos), the
single-click keyboard and mouse have also banished all computer codes or
shortcuts. To move a paragraph, press the \"copy\" key, written in black
and white, then \"paste\". Sold for 395 euros (without screen or
Internet connection) or 695 euros in a complete version, this computer
has already carved out its small success of esteem by word of mouth in
senior circles and aims for 15,000 sales, solely by mail order, by the
end of 2005. Here too, the service is tailor-made with the possibility
of choosing paid installation at home (60% of buyers), or even taking a
few introductory lessons. You can also train yourself with the help of
videos and a \"Learn\" button with practical exercises to boot, or use
the services of a remote trainer also indicated by a small icon.
\"Everything is done to reduce the failure rate\", explains Christophe
Berly who admits to only two cases of absolute recalcitrance to
Ordissimo-style formatting. Be careful, however, not to take users for
naive people. \"Don\'t use the simplicity of the Minitel as advertising
any more,\" wrote a fan of the Ordissimo recently by email, \"I find
that reductive.\" Developed using free software and assembled in France,
the Ordissimo intends to progress with its users. Its designers are
preparing a menu of applications that can be downloaded online, some of
which are very cutting-edge (telephony, music, photo editing, games,
etc.) for those \"who want to go further.\" This time, the high-tech
level.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1610

The failures of the computer systems used during the last municipal
elections have given Quebec citizens a flagrant demonstration of the
urgent need to use free software during operations as important as an
election. Indeed, only software developed, verified and improved by a
large working community can inspire the confidence that the use of
software tools in democratic life requires. We therefore call on our
fellow citizens, Quebec businesses and the institutions concerned to
support the creation of a broad coalition promoting the use of free
software in electoral processes. Of course, all of the problems
mentioned recently are not necessarily the result of flaws in
proprietary software: server congestion, operator training, risk
assessment, power outages, fires, etc. On the other hand, the overall
situation requires that we raise the level of trust in the systems used
in order to have absolute assurance that one\'s vote is properly
counted, to have a reasonable and transparent recount possibility, to
have free and rapid access to the election results, and, above all, to
maintain full public control over the democratic process. Free software
is software delivered with its source code in such a way that it can be
accessed, consulted, copied, modified and redistributed, thus evolving
continuously towards a more sophisticated version, in a context of
cooperative and community development. The free operating system
GNU/Linux, named after the GNU project of the FreeSoftwareFoundation and
the Linux kernel, itself an amalgam of the name of its first designer,
the Finnish Linus Torvalds, and the Unix system that is at its origin,
is an example of free software. General Manager, Génération Linux

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1611

These are global cooperatives, run by tens of thousands of people
working together via the Internet. Their names? GNU/Linux, a computer
operating system that runs hundreds of thousands of machines worldwide.
Or Wikipedia, a free, open encyclopedia accessible via the Web in dozens
of languages. What do these two projects, and thousands of similar
projects that have appeared in recent years, have in common? The result
is accessible to everyone for free, modifiable by anyone, and belongs to
no one; they are immaterial \"common goods,\" born from a curious
digital cauldron fed by volunteer amateurs, professionals, and
companies. Yochai Benkler, a law professor at Yale University in the
United States, distinguishes these \"common goods produced in
cooperation\" from the \"structure of the industrial economy driven by
the State and the market.\" Hot topics. This astonishing phenomenon has
not so far needed turnkey programs or State decisions. Simply the
militant energy of a few charismatic figures (like the bearded
post-hippie Richard Stallman, at the origin of free software in the
80s), allied with an anonymous international of sharers who are
increasingly numerous on the planet. \"The arrival of the Internet for
immaterial creation in general means that we can create together in a
simple way outside the organization, notes the economist Nicolas
Jullien. This is the first time on this scale, even if it already
existed in a more reduced way on a local scale or between a few
actors.\" It is difficult to stick a label on these digital cooperatives
that touch on all the burning political issues, from the mode of
production to property (intellectual, in this case) and wage labor. The
most visible figures of this movement are as much communists as
socialists, American democrats or even \"libertarians\", like the
American Eric Raymond, pro-free software and right-wing anarchist in
favor of firearms. However, there are some classic markers of a
cooperative and libertarian left. This model notably blurs the
distinction between the consumer and the producer, as opposed to the
\"available brains\" of the TF1 model: the Wikipedia user is both a
reader of articles and called upon to correct the errors he spots or to
contribute his knowledge to the community. Christophe Aguiton, ex-Sud
and a pickerel earning money from the LCR, sees it as a return to the
sources of 19th century socialism, when \"Proudhon or Marx put forward
the idea that socialism was the cooperative\". The 20th century and the
preeminence of the State would crush these ideas, particularly in
France, before \"their recent revival\", continues Aguiton. The
cooperative plus the Internet \"offer a new way of producing common
goods, created on a voluntary basis by individuals directly for
humanity\", in a different way from \"common goods under the
responsibility of the State, such as roads or education\". It should be
noted in passing that these modern \"common goods\", just like the more
traditional ones produced by the State, are compatible with capitalism
and the market economy: several companies, such as IBM, have invested
massively in free software and sell services around the systems thus
produced. The collaborative encyclopedia Wikipedia boosts the audience
of major search engines, thus attracting advertising flows. Which leads
Nicolas Jullien to say that \"it is also right-wing because the company
reduces its production costs and we are really in free competition\".
But if the company can benefit from these cooperative common goods, it
can never appropriate them and block access to them: specific copyright
contracts guarantee at each stage the collective ownership of the
results of the common work. \"Fundamentally, it is a left-wing fight,
because these models make it possible to fight against the expansion of
the sphere of private property\", believes Aguiton. Major moves. If the
State and politicians have not encouraged the emergence of these
high-tech cooperatives, their role is now central to preserving and
encouraging them. Because many firms are harassing States with major
lobbying efforts to toughen intellectual property rules and deprive
these collaborative projects of air \"which threaten traditional
businesses based on intellectual property\", from Hollywood to software
to the pharmaceutical industry, according to Yochai Benkler. The founder
of Microsoft, Bill Gates, thus castigated the \"communists\" of free
software while the multiplication of patents on living things is
restricting the emergence of open knowledge bases on genetics. For the
socialist Christian Paul, politicians can therefore oppose \"the
infinite extension of the field of intellectual property\" and \"favor
these alternative forms in radical opposition to the way in which the
market organizes the world\".

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1612

On September 21, the day after Simon Wiesenthal\'s death, the article on
the online encyclopedia wikipedia.org about the concentration camp
survivor was sabotaged by a far-right group. His biography was loaded
with wild allegations about his supposed homosexuality. Three minutes
later, the hack had disappeared, corrected by an Internet user: the
original version is back in place. This is one example among hundreds of
the permanent tensions suffered by the cooperative online encyclopedia,
which anyone can modify and enrich at will. And which always make the
success and growing quality of Wikipedia paradoxical: more than a
hundred languages, two million articles in total, including more than
750,000 in English, 175,000 in French and even nearly 1,400 in Breton.
How could such an open knowledge base resist extremists of all kinds,
maniacs and, more commonly, mediocrity? The academic Claire Nacher, from
Paris-III, sees in this project \"a denial of organization and a denial
of politics\", which \"generates at best cacophony and, at worst, the
takeover by forces that are neither democratic nor disinterested (1)\".
If, despite its imperfections and attempts at sabotage, Wikipedia is
enriched every day, it is because the project is organized. Like open
collaborative projects, such as free software, Wikipedia is not a
utopian mess without rules. It is an \"eminently political project\", as
stated in a text available on the encyclopedia itself. With its initial
\"constitution\", decreed by the founder, the American Jimmy Wales:
neutrality of points of view, absence of editorial committee,
non-signature of articles. So many choices are debatable and discussed,
often within the community of \"Wikipedians\". Similarly, if officially
any Internet user can enrich the articles, the most invested among them
are responsible for ensuring constant surveillance. \"Vandalism is dealt
with by administrators, who can go back to previous versions of an
article, all archived\", says Alexis Dufrenoy, computer scientist and
spokesperson for the French branch of the Wikimedia Foundation, which
oversees the project. Positions of responsibility assigned by
co-optation. Wikipedia is constantly the scene of \"edit wars\", where
opposing points of view clash, such as \"the very long controversy over
the article \"Abortion\" in the English version\", says Dufrenoy. In
France, an arbitration committee chosen by elections via the Internet if
no consensus is found plays the role of Blue Helmets when the editors do
not agree on the discussion page associated with each article. Recently,
he tried to reconcile pro and anti-Bogdanoff twins who were tearing each
other apart over the (dubious) scientific quality of the work of the
former presenters of Temps X. (1)
www.ccr.jussieu.fr/urfist/cerise/cerEval.htm

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1613

Read Common Cause by Philippe Aigrain. Fayard, 2005, 18 euros. The
Future of Ideas by Lawrence Lessig. Presses universitaires de Lyon,
2005, 350 pp., 25 euros. On the Web The page of the economist Nicolas
Jullien: www-eco.enst-bretagne.fr/Membres_enstB /nicolas.html Download
free software & various texts on the domain: www.framasoft.net

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1614

Brussels special envoy In the Lakensestraat, in the heart of Brussels,
shop windows become screens at nightfall. The strange creatures of
Marius Watz (www.unlekker.net) deploy colorful tentacles that densify
into complex patterns before their flaky disintegration. A few steps
away, we fly over the geometric urban landscapes of Elout de Kok
(www.xs4all.nl/\~elout), navigating in their bristling 3D structures. At
the heart of the device, the MediaRuimte, an experimental space managed
by LAB\[au\], a laboratory of architecture, urban planning and
multimedia production, curator of this new exhibition with the coded
name. Drawing machine. For two years, LAB\[au\] has been in charge of
the digital and experimental side of the Cimatics festival, dedicated to
audiovisual arts and VJing, which is being held, for the third time, in
the Belgian capital. \"The title of the exhibition refers to the
programming language Processing, an open-source tool that allows you to
combine images, animation and common sound, explains Manuel Abendroth,
co-founder of LAB\[au\], a simplified language created by artists for an
artistic purpose \[read opposite\]. Perhaps more importantly than the
tool itself, Processing has become a platform for artists who have many
things in common and who find a family there.\" A new generation, raised
with computers, for whom manipulating code is as natural as drawing or
painting. They create autonomous abstract visuals that generate
themselves, drawing machines that develop before our eyes, sound
compositions that never repeat themselves, new instruments for live
performances. The works exhibited have in common their abstract
character, \"with a relationship to the biological and the organic\",
comments Manuel Abendroth who recalls that many algorithms are derived
from \"this mathematical attempt to describe a biological phenomenon\".
Brazilian Dimitre Lima (http://dmtr.org) presents strange crackling
topographies in the basement. The images captured by a webcam are
transformed into relief, contour lines themselves translated into
sounds. Golan Levin (www.flong.com) invites the viewer to trace lines
with his mouse, threads that escape his control, twist, disintegrate in
real time and to music. In his installation Floo, mouse movements
trigger the growth and dispersion of filamentary spirals, whose behavior
makes strident drones appear. The Processing scene brings together
creators from the \"do it yourself\" culture rather than art schools,
like Elout de Kok, who grew up with the first video games, influenced by
the demo scene (a haunt of die-hard programmers), more accustomed to
dance floors than galleries. Just like the Austrian Lia (aka
\"tinylittleelements\", http://lia.sil.at) in a live performance this
Friday evening at the MediaRuimte with the Akuvido collective and the
nexsound label (www.nexsound.org). \"I move in a border zone between
art, design and popular culture,\" says Marius Watz, curator of a
Generator.x exhibition on generative art in Norway that has just ended
in situ but continues online in the form of a blog. Generative art is
the bastard child of abstract art from the 60s, a return to retinal art
that translates into a certain aesthetic formalism, an abstract visual
system generated by lines of code.\" Where software acts as the
material. Software developed by artists who do not hesitate to get their
hands dirty. \"If we want to act on the world, we have to act on
software, try to translate what we have in mind through code.\" In the
systems he programs, Marius Watz preserves a part of randomness, seduced
by the unpredictable nature of his creations, between the mechanical and
the organic: \"The machine can create horrible things, but also
marvelous visuals that we would never have thought of doing.\" The
artist admits to seeking a kind of \"visual hedonism,\" which does not
prevent him from developing more conceptual work in parallel (like
Universal Digest Machine which attempts to answer the question \"the
web: how big is it?\" on http://spider.unlekker.net). \"Maturation.\"
The prettiness of these works that impress and flatter the eye often
earns them the reproach of being simply decorative, without depth or
critical scope. \"This art form is in a maturation phase,\" tempers
Manuel Abendroth. As technologies are increasingly integrated into our
environment, a new context is gradually being created from which real
artistic, philosophical or sociological positions will emerge.\" The
youngest have no such hesitation, bickering to test the interactive
installation of LAB\[au\] Place Sainte-Catherine. No need for them to
know that this piece, Point, Ligne, Surface, is a tribute to Mondrian\'s
Broadway Boogie-Woogie. Perched on tiptoe to access the screen, a little
boy grabs with the stylus the points, lines and surfaces in RGB (the
colors of the computer screen) to which spatialized sounds are
associated, throws them frantically on the screen, creating on the
ground, around him, a Mondrianesque painting hopping under the proud eye
of his father.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1615

Rewarded this year by the prestigious Net Vision prize awarded by Ars
Electronica, Processing (1) is an open source programming language whose
particularity is to be close to verbal language. \"It is a
simplification of the code, it makes it more concrete, explains Manuel
Abendroth de Labau. To draw a line, you just have to type \"draw line\".
We lose this fear of code.\" The tool allows people who are not pure and
hard coders (students, artists, designers and architects) to easily
access the programming of animated images and sounds, and to sketch
prototypes. An alternative to commercial software, this project
initiated by two artists from MIT Medialab, Casey Reas and Ben Fry, has
generated a large community that contributes to the development of the
code. The works can be discovered in the exhibition section of the site.
(1) http://processing.org

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1616

Word processing, spreadsheet, database, drawing and presentation tools:
this free software, version 2.0 of which has just been released, is a
great alternative to Microsoft Office. LITTLE BY LITTLE, OpenOffice is
making its way. Increasingly used by administrations, schools and
universities, but also by businesses and individuals, this free software
is in fact an ideal solution for anyone looking for an alternative to
Microsoft Office. In fact, the resemblance is so perfect that we could
talk about cloning: same menus, same functions, and perfect file
compatibility. A Word or Excel document opens without problem and keeps
the same attributes in OpenOffice. For their part, Microsoft software
automatically recognizes files exported by OpenOffice. But here\'s the
thing: OpenOffice is free. Originally developed under the name
StarOffice by the German publisher StarDivision, it was recovered by Sun
Microsystems, which made it a commercial software and authorized a
community of independent programmers to distribute it for free under the
name OpenOffice. Adapted to different operating systems (including
Windows, Mac OS X and Linux) and available in several languages
(including Arabic, Hebrew and Thai), the OpenOffice suite maintains the
same appearance regardless of the computer on which it is used. Once
installed, it is divided into six modules: a word processor, a
spreadsheet, a database manager, a presentation software, a mathematical
formula editor and a drawing program. The word processor Writer is very
easy to use. With its correction and layout tools, it has nothing to
envy the best representatives in the sector. It can also manage the
display of images, integrate tables and links that point to a section of
the same document or to the Internet. The spreadsheet Calc has more than
450 functions and a quantity of standard tools (sorting, formatting,
scenarios, consolidation, diagrams, etc.). Like Microsoft Office,
OpenOffice has templates and wizards, a programming language inspired by
Basic to develop macros, an image gallery to enrich texts and
presentations, a spell checker and a multimedia file reader. As a bonus,
each module can save its documents directly in PDF format. Version 2.0,
more pleasant to use and more homogeneous, is distinguished by new
animations and transitions in the presentation software and by better
compatibility, both with Microsoft Office documents and with those of
WordPerfect Office. It will simply be criticized for sometimes being a
little slow on the most modest configurations. For the moment, the
French version is under development, but it should be available in a few
weeks. n OpenOffice.org, to download on www.openoffice.org/ DS

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1617

The race for the leadership of the Parti Québécois has so far given rise
to four regional debates, called tribunes and composed of periods, which
brought together the nine official candidates in Sherbrooke, Montreal,
Trois-Rivières and Quebec City. Direct observation of the candidates\'
speeches, carried out as a member of the audiences of these public
meetings, made it possible to define types of remarks and behaviours
that reflect their respective views and political orientations. The
remarks of these contenders for the position of leader of the PQ can be
grouped into the following four categories: denunciations,
accomplishments, solutions and panaceas. Remarks and journalistic
interest In terms of denunciations, the prize clearly goes to
Jean-Claude St-André, who attacked both \"the strategy of fiscal
imbalance\" and the actions of multinationals in Quebec. The so-called
left-wing candidates such as Pierre Dubuc and Gilbert Paquette
vigorously deplored \"the decline of French in Quebec.\" Jean Ouimet was
scandalized by the fact that, according to him, 95% of Quebec artists
live \"in the poverty hole.\" Pauline Marois and André Boisclair, for
their part, made very few denunciatory remarks in their speeches. Louis
Bernard stigmatized the invasive role that Ottawa has given itself in
the development of culture. As for Richard Legendre, he expressed his
dissatisfaction at seeing the Quebec government struggling with a budget
of \$55 billion rather than \$90 billion. The accomplishments were
mainly of two types: those resulting from ministerial actions and those
attributed to personal actions. André Boisclair and Pauline Marois
referred to government policies in which they took part as ministers,
such as the zero deficit policy for the former and the daycare policy
for the latter. Richard Legendre proudly highlighted his achievement of
the stadium at Jarry Park. Gilbert Paquette highlighted his role in
creating companies related to the development of free software. Both
presented these achievements as examples of contributions to sustainable
development in Quebec. Solutions to specific problems were expressed in
abundance by the majority of candidates, for example the creation of a
national water institute in the Old Capital (André Boisclair). They
actually turned out to be expressions of new or old ideas that the press
coverage did not highlight. Why? Because, for the press, a new or old
idea that is not susceptible to controversy simply does not exist. There
was one major exception that confirms this journalistic rule: the
declaration of independence provided for in the PQ platform after a YES
victory in the referendum, a measure contested by Louis Bernard, who
considered it \"unrealistic.\" Sovereignty No observer or audience
member of these four platforms could dispute the fact that the panacea
for Quebec\'s political, economic, social and cultural constraints is,
according to all the candidates, sovereignty. However, to achieve this,
each of them emphasized an instrumental panacea that revealed their
personal political dream. André Boisclair resorted to positive realism
by proposing that Quebecers be more \"able to live with \[their\]
successes.\" Pauline Marois made rallying the goal of her action as
future leader. Louis Bernard advocated a quiet break so that
independence could \"be done properly.\" It was the supposed budgetary
windfall that seduced Richard Legendre when independence was achieved.
Gilbert Paquette could not see the future of Quebec without
technological innovation. Unionization is the cure for all of Quebec\'s
ills, in Pierre Dubuc\'s opinion. Jean Ouimet invited \"citizens\" to
pedal for \"sustainable development\" by moving toward the collective
development of a \"social contract.\" Not to be outdone, Jean-Claude
St-André instead ordered them to urgently resort to immediate action,
head first, \"to achieve independence.\" Finally, Ghislain Lebel
insistently reminded his fellow candidates that nothing can be
accomplished without recognizing the mistakes of the past. The upcoming
debates should continue in this vein. Oratorical performance In
addition, the candidates\' behaviors were defined based on their
respective oratorical performance by emphasizing their main statements
during the various periods of the debates. Here are these behaviors, in
alphabetical order. - Louis Bernard, the bold: the next Quebec elections
will be \"pre-referendums.\" \"As soon as sovereignty has given us the
means,\" he insisted, \"we will establish a guaranteed minimum income
for all.\" In his mind, the decentralization of powers to the regions is
another imperative resulting from Quebec\'s accession to sovereignty. -
André Boisclair, the resolute: the candidate leading in the polls has
committed to reducing the debt while protecting social programs. To
Pierre Dubuc, who, in Trois-Rivières, saw the need to \"tell people from
different cultural communities\" to take part in the fight of a people,
the people of Quebec, who want their right to self-determination, André
Boisclair added firmly and promptly: \"And they are part of it, of this
people, they are part of it, of this nation!\" - Pierre Dubuc, the
mobilizer: \"Immigrant workers need to unionize,\" he noted in
Sherbrooke. He also reiterated his conviction that the Parti Québécois
has no more important task than to reconnect with the union movement and
progressive circles \"to win the next election.\" - Ghislain Lebel, the
annoying one: in his opinion, \"the PQ dances badly: a little step to
the left, a little step to the right.\" Following Pauline Marois, who
listed a series of government interventions such as support for
employment, the transformation of businesses and aid \"for workers,\"
Lebel shouted before the Montreal audience: \"Ms. Marois, you\'re going
to stop that! You\'re going to confuse a Jesuit!\" - Richard Legendre,
the diligent one: he essentially read the same text with great care
during the introduction and closing of the debates in the conventional
manner of rhetoricians from the old classical colleges. During the
confrontations of the trios and the question periods, he almost recited
it by heart. - Pauline Marois, the warned one: she insistently
emphasized having headed 11 ministries in the Quebec government. She was
inexhaustible in giving examples of this or that in order to enlighten
audiences about the relevance of implementing certain political
measures. - Jean Ouimet, the foreseer: he foresaw the \"global
challenges that await us.\" - Gilbert Paquette, the enterprising: he
suggested channeling Quebecers\' savings into sustainable development
\"to prevent them from going abroad.\" - Jean-Claude St-André, the
attacker: he constantly launched an attack on \"the rich who do not pay
their fair share of taxes.\" In Quebec City, André Boisclair, the
leader, attacked Jean Charest \"as a simple activist\" in his
conclusion. And, in less time than it takes to say it, he found himself
acting, perhaps presciently, as \"leader of the opposition, if you trust
me.\" Time will tell. Jacques Rivet: Full professor in the information
and communication department at Laval University

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1618

Microsoft FOUNDER and Chairman Bill Gates was due to come to Paris on
Monday 24 October to sign the framework agreement between his group and
the National Institute for Research in Computer Science and Automation
(Inria). Known since 26 April, this text provides for joint teams to
work in Orsay (Essonne), in the suburbs of Paris. The agreement
stipulates that the scientific advances resulting from this partnership
will be published - as is customary in the scientific community - but,
above all, that the software designed by these Franco-American teams
will be distributed under an open source license, i.e. free of charge.
This decision marks a major turnaround in Microsoft\'s industrial
property policy. Until now, the world\'s leading software publisher was
opposed to free software. On the contrary, it almost systematically
patented its software in the United States, to block the path of its
competitors. Mr Gates did not hesitate to describe the followers of free
software as \"modern-day communists\". Microsoft currently holds 6,000
patents and has 10,000 pending applications\... in the United States.
Because, in Europe, software is not patentable; it is subject to
copyright and is protected as such. The agreement between Microsoft and
Inria nevertheless provides that, if the work of the joint teams gives
rise to non-software \"inventions\" that do not fall within the scope of
a scientific publication - such as algorithms - these will be patented
with the European Patent Office (EPO). The work resulting from this
framework agreement will be jointly owned: 50% by Inria and 50% by
Microsoft. Two major categories of research themes have been defined.
These are, on the one hand, the use of computers to prove modern
mathematical theorems that are too complex to be demonstrated by a human
being; on the other hand, the development of computer tools allowing
other sciences (physics, chemistry, biology, etc.) to manage gigantic
databases. There are several reasons for Microsoft\'s about-face on
intellectual property. It may want to better defend itself against
attacks for abuse of a dominant position. This about-face was also the
only way to work with scientists at Inria, a research center that
includes many supporters of free software. Finally, one might also
wonder whether Microsoft is not beginning to realize, like IBM before
it, that by trying too hard to use patents it risks blocking the
software market by preventing small but highly innovative firms from
putting their products on the market. To the detriment, also, of the big
players in the sector.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1619

New York from our correspondent Generally, an author experiences some
satisfaction of self-esteem in signing a book: controlling the content,
seeing his name on the cover\... This is not the case for a small number
of them who choose a rather daring form of publication, on the Internet:
\"wikibooks\". Not only does their name not appear next to the title,
they do not receive any royalties, but they control nothing. Any reader
can correct an error, clarify a passage or add a chapter if they wish.
And yet, the project, reserved for school textbooks and guides, attracts
a growing number of authors. 12,000 titles. Derived from the Wikipedia
encyclopedia, also distributed and transformed at every moment on the
Web (Libération of November 22, 2004), wikibooks appeared in July 2003.
Today, the catalog has nearly 12,000 titles and surprises by its
variety. Many books for learning languages (a Mandarin Chinese manual is
the book of the month distinguished by users), computer manuals, maths,
philosophy, art, law, mostly in English, but also in several dozen other
languages. Among the \"wikibooks\" (in French) completed, still few in
number, we can count for example: S\'initier au abalier en 10 leçons or
le Biodiesel. Why write a wikibook? \"For the authors, it is a fun
social activity, it is the pleasure of interacting with intelligent
people, believes the American Jimmy Wales, the founder of Wikipedia. And
then it is a charitable action. They contribute to the knowledge of
humanity.\" The site, in its explanations, imagines this reaction of an
author: \"I can\'t imagine seeing my magnificent prose edited by any
passerby. It is mine, why should I let others touch it?\" Answer: \"We
work together on the statements of what we know (\...). Each of us
benefits from this arrangement.\" And no one owns the texts they author,
they share them. The project is directly inspired by free software,
distributed free of charge and modifiable by users. Some authors are
still not ready to accept that anyone intervenes in their works in any
way they want. Thus, those of How to Build a Computer published this
warning: \"The editors of this book have developed a code of conduct to
follow to participate in the writing of the book\" and recommend that
they be contacted before changing everything. Surveillance. Any Internet
user can start creating a wikibook, alone or with others. Sometimes,
others spontaneously join the project and a small editorial team is
formed. For each chapter, a discussion space allows authors to compare
their points of view. The system also keeps a version of each step in
the development of the texts. It is therefore possible to go back if a
user gets noticed by writing anything. For example, if a revisionist
intervenes in a work devoted to the Second World War, as soon as a
reader (or a co-author) reports it, his additions will be deleted and
the passage placed under surveillance. Other projects are currently
being developed: Wikijunior, the publication of children\'s books; there
are already a few titles, for example one on the solar system. Even more
ambitious, Wikiversity, online courses allowing users to become \"the
agents of their learning\", according to the wishes of the Irishman
Cormac Lawler, one of the promoters of the project.
http://fr.wikibooks.org/wiki /Accueil

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1620

Why go out and buy a new \$50 fan when you can spend 12 hours
painstakingly straightening each blade on the one you have? That\'s
according to the author of these pages (in English), who offer four
different methods to do it. The one we tried: 1) determine which blade
is unbalanced; 2) test all possible configurations until you find the
ideal position, number and orientation of the clothespins that will act
as counterweights; and 3) glue on a permanent counterweight (metal
washers) that will weigh exactly the same as the clothespins. We lost
patience before we succeeded\... Effectiveness of the result: 1/5
Quality of the explanations: 5/5 Cool factor: 1/5
www.factsfacts.com/MyHomeRepair/FanWobble.htm Black hat The techno word
to plug \"A black hat hacked my computer.\" The color of the hat is a
sign of moral inclination towards Good or Evil in the exclusive club of
little computer geniuses. As in the old cowboy movies, where these
symbols originate, the good white hat will use his talents for
acceptable purposes, while the bad black hat will not hesitate to commit
the worst computer crimes (intrusions, spam, viruses, etc.). The \"black
hats\" are destined for a life of solitude and disgrace, since they harm
the reputation of the entire community of honest hackers. Moreover, the
most prestigious French-language dictionaries unfairly generalize the
misdeeds of a minority when they translate \"hacker\" as \"pirate.\"
Come on, it all depends on the hat! Send us your suggestions for techno
words (English or French) to actuel@lapresse.ca. The anniversary October
1958: the first video game appears on an oscilloscope. In an effort to
bring an entertaining aspect to science education, William Higinbotham
created Tennis for Two for the Brookhaven National Laboratory Open
House, a nuclear research center in New York State. An analog computer,
used to calculate missile trajectories, displays the trajectory of a
ball on an oscilloscope screen, with which visitors can interact. The
net is represented by a white line at the bottom of the screen (the game
is seen from the side). In a later version, Tennis for Two will allow
players to play on the Moon (low gravity) or on Jupiter (high gravity).
The techno quote \"Linux is like the big brother who fought all the hard
battles to delay curfew and get access to the car keys. After him, life
was easy for the other free software people.\" - Marc Reury, president
of the free software publisher JBoss, reacting to the 40% increase in
the number of users of the Linux operating system in one year. Source:
slashdot.org Digital Internet use by Canadian schoolchildren: between
parents\' desires and young people\'s reality. Canadian schoolchildren
spend an average of 9.5 hours per week on the Internet. Seventy-two
percent of parents believe that it helps them with their studies. In
fact, 17% of schoolchildren actually use it to study, while 40% connect
to it to play online video games. E-mail and chat are the other most
common uses. Survey by Ipsos-Reid for Bell Canada, September 2005.
Interviews with 2,151 parents of schoolchildren aged 5 to 17. Accuracy
rate: 95%. Margin of error: 2.1 percentage points.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1621

The American stock market ended in the green yesterday, supported by
good corporate results, despite a new increase in energy prices. At the
end of the session bell, the Dow Jones gained 0.80% (79.69 points),
closing at 10,552.78 points and the Nasdaq gained 1.20% (28.82 points),
at 2,141.22 points, its strongest increase in ten weeks. The Standard
and Poor\'s 500 index (SP 500) ended up 0.92% (+11.21 points), at
1,228.10 points. \"It is very difficult to identify a reason for the
market\'s rise,\" acknowledged Hugh Johnson, analyst at Johnson
Illington Advisors. Nevertheless, we can note that the results of
PepsiCo and Red Hat were encouraging. This could have been the catalyst
that pulled the stocks higher,\" he indicated. Red Hat, the American
publisher of a version of the free software Linux, ended with a
spectacular jump of 29.68% to 21.44 dollars. The group saw its net
profit increase by 40% during the last quarter, the profit per share
being posted at 9 cents, where analysts expected 7. For its part,
PepsiCo ended with a gain of 2.62% to 56.50 dollars. The food group
posted profits above expectations in the third quarter, thanks to its
performances in non-carbonated drinks and abroad, and it raised its
objectives for the whole year on Thursday. Among the strongest risers on
the Nasdaq, eBay gained 6%, on anticipations of a quarterly profit above
expectations. Conversely, RIM (Research In Motion), maker of Blackberry
handheld computers, lost 9.4%, faced with increased competition in its
market after the announcement of an alliance between its rival Palm and
Microsoft. US markets were also supported by the news that weekly
jobless claims fell more than expected. In addition, investors seem to
think that the impact on the economy from hurricanes Katrina and Rita
will be rather modest. Stock indices were not affected by a slight rise
in crude oil and a new closing record for natural gas. On the New York
Mercantile Exchange, a barrel of light sweet crude for delivery in
November ended up 44 cents, at \$66.79. The natural gas contract ended
at a new record, at \$14.19 per cubic foot (0.028 m3). On the Nasdaq,
1.80 billion shares were traded and 1.63 billion on the New York Stock
Exchange. The bond market ended lower: the yield on the 10-year Treasury
note rose to 4.289% from 4.262% Wednesday evening, while that of the
30-year note advanced to 4.539% from 4.501%. The euro was trading last
night at 1.2030 dollars.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1622

Special correspondent in Copenhagen \"You\'d think that beer is the best
medium for discussing intellectual property,\" jokes Rasmus Nielsen,
from the Danish collective Superflex. Their \"open source beer\" (see
next page) has gone around the world, widely relayed by the media. On
this rainy Saturday in July, the biggest Danish public television
channel is visiting them to discuss and taste the famous Free Beer. The
project was born as part of a workshop that the Superflex were hosting
with students from the Copenhagen University of New Technologies on
copyright issues. \"We were thinking about a way to extend the methods
of sharing and exchanging resources that are in vogue in the digital
world, to apply the philosophy of free software to the real world. Using
a product as universal as beer to talk about copyright could be an
interesting experiment.\" For several months, the university canteen,
bathed in the aroma of beer, served as a laboratory to develop this
first royalty-free beer. Designed using classic brewing methods, version
1.0 of the beverage includes an ingredient that makes it "unique":
guarana (35 milligrams per liter), an Amazonian plant rich in caffeine,
used in energy drinks, supposed to compensate for the drowsiness induced
by this rather strong beer (6%), but with an original flavor. Monopoly.
The first version is called "Vores Øl", "our beer", a reference to the
slogan of the Danish behemoth Carlsberg, which has had a monopoly on
hoppy beverages here since it merged with its rival Tuborg, the king of
luxury Pils. It is difficult to find other brands in the bars of
Copenhagen, where small family breweries were swarming. "There are many
similarities between Microsoft and Carlsberg. For example, if someone
opens a bar, they will have a visit from a Carlsberg representative who
will offer to install all the plumbing for free, on condition that they
sell exclusively their affiliated products and brands.\" Unlike these
big brands that jealously guard their manufacturing secrets, the source
code (or recipe) of Vores Øl as well as the brand (design, name, logo,
music) are published under Creative Commons. The chosen license allows
anyone to copy the beer, modify it, or even sell it on condition that
they keep the drink free and credit the authors. \"Brewing beer takes
time and money, it\'s more complicated than copying an MP3 file, hence
the choice to allow the product to be marketed,\" explains Rasmus. The
idea is to make it the Linux of beer, by offering people the chance to
reproduce and improve it like a piece of open source software.\" The
story is to see if the new versions spun off from Vores Øl 1.0 can give
rise to varieties of beer that are superior in taste and creativity to
those of the big brands. A challenge that seems well on track given the
enthusiastic feedback on the forum from budding brewers from
Afghanistan, Poland, the United Arab Emirates, Indonesia, Brazil, etc.
\"Can we think of objects, products in this way, what does it mean, how
can we broaden it, apply it to medicines, for example?\" Rasmus asks. In
June, when Free Beer (the international version of Vores Øl) was
launched, the collective opened a shop in their headquarters in
Norrebrø, a former working-class neighborhood that was very popular,
with its motley population of immigrants and young hipsters. Opposite
the halal butcher and a wall dripping with protest stickers and
anti-Bush graffiti, a stone\'s throw from the most popular local bar,
the Copyshop has quickly become the hub of Danish dissidence. As its
name suggests, the store only sells \"modified originals, improved
copies, political anti-brands\", \"products that challenge intellectual
property\". On the table, sits the photocopier where you can reproduce
the recipe for Free Beer. In the window, a selection of icons of the
counter-economy: Linux kits, the Blackspot Sneaker (Libération, December
25, 2004) launched by the ad-breakers Adbusters, a 70% biodegradable
sneaker, made in Portugal, which mimics the Converse (bought by Nike),
where a black dot serves as an antilogo. On the shelves, free beer of
course, made by hand, but also Mecca-Cola, the \"ethical coke\" created
by the naturalized French Tunisian Taoufik Mathlouthi, propelled as an
emblem of Muslim resistance against \"American hegemony\", part of the
profits of which are donated to Palestinian associations. Stimulating.
Inspired by the Mecca-Cola experience (but with a significantly
different perspective), another drink invites you to drink responsibly:
the Guarana Power energy soda that the Superflex developed in 2003 as
part of a workshop with a peasant cooperative in Maués, in the Brazilian
Amazon. The Guarana Power bottle openly copies the design of one of the
most consumed sodas in South America, Guarana Antarctica, a product of
AmBev (American Beverage Corporation), a multinational that has
distribution agreements with Pepsi Co, in litigation with Superflex
(read opposite). Guarana Power was conceived as a response to the
pressure from these companies, organized into a cartel, which took
advantage of their monopoly on the purchase of raw materials to lower
the price of the guarana berry by 80%. \"We thought of a way to reverse
this economic logic,\" explains Rasmus, \"by using the companies (i.e.
their brand, logo, name, colors) as raw material.\" The Guarana Power
counter-soda is produced in Denmark with guarana purchased from the
Brazilian cooperative at a decent price. A small soda company is
responsible for its distribution in Denmark, in small cafes, alternative
venues, clubs. Before opening the Copyshop, Superflex organized Guarana
Power Bars in its premises, with film screenings, concerts and tastings
of stimulating cocktails (vodka-guarana power). "It's an opportunity to
continue the conversation about intellectual property," says Michael of
Copenhagen Brains, an activist and resident VJ at Culture Box and
co-founder of Copyshop. Most of the proceeds go to the Power Foundation,
which supports initiatives to rebalance trade with commodity producers.
Since 1993, the Superflex trio has developed a practice that combines
art, design and commerce to explore globalization through collaborative
projects. At the heart of their work is the creation of "Tools," "tools
that gain their non-economic but general value when they are used." One
such tool is Supercopy, a series of plagiarisms of existing products
that they pirate or remanufacture: counterfeit Lacoste T-shirts
(imported from Thailand) stamped Supercopy that they had runwayed at the
Copenhagen Fashion Fair in 2002, copies of Ancel pudding transformed
into Social Pudding, on sale at the shop. Another example: the Biogas
lamp, an \"adaptation\" of the famous lamp by Danish designer Poul
Henningsen so that it could run on biogas, produced from organic waste,
intended for populations in Asia and Africa who do not have access to
electricity. When these copies of the lamp were exhibited in Malmø
(Sweden) in 2002, the Louis Poulsen company, which manufactures the
originals, demanded the closure of the exhibition. \"We found it totally
absurd. Poul Henningsen, who was a communist and who had designed this
lamp in 1958 for the working class, would certainly have appreciated
this diversion which is faithful to the spirit of its creator.\" A new
example, according to them, of the counter-productivity of copyright.
\"Intellectual property, whether it takes the form of copyright,
licenses or patents, has expanded exponentially over the last twenty
years. The fundamental legal concept is \"if value then right\": when
there is economic value, there is intellectual property. The open source
movement was formed as a reaction because this ownership of the code
hindered the best possible development of software,\" explains
Superflex. The artists have turned the formula into \"if value, then
copy.\" \"Demons.\" A formula that also suits Piratgruppen, a group that
campaigns for the legalization of peer-to-peer networks in Copenhagen.
Their T-shirts are on sale at the Copyshop: two crossbones topped with
an audio cassette instead of a skull. \"Already, at the time of the
cassette, the majors had campaigned with the slogan \"home taping is
killing the music industry,\" recalls Claus Pedersen, one of the
founders of Piratgruppen. Their information base offers nearly 200 user
guides on the various download platforms, a forum, news. And tries to
popularize his ideas among Danish politicians, \"but we are considered
demons,\" regrets Claus. He too would like to broaden the spirit of the
immaterial world to the real world. For the start of the academic year,
Piratgruppen is preparing a major campaign: to make the main educational
books freely available on peer-to-peer networks. \"In Denmark, books are
unaffordable. A student has to spend around 1,000 euros a year. Usually,
one of them buys them and everyone else photocopies them. But it ends up
being expensive. So we are going to digitize them so that they can
download them. We hope that students will participate in the operation
and take the time to scan the books.\" Photos Heine Pedersen

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1623

Source code is a set of instructions written in a computer programming
language to obtain a program for a computer. It can be related to a
culinary recipe, an organized list of ingredients in defined quantities
and functions, the aim of which is to obtain a result targeted by the
cook, according to a specific technique. It is generally not public, and
is protected by copyright. Opensource. This term characterizes software
whose source code is available, modifiable and redistributable under
certain conditions. The most famous opensource software is Linux.
Copyright. Copyrights are a form of intellectual property. It is the
Anglo-Saxon version of copyright. Source: Wikipedia.org

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1624

Three recent signs seem to indicate that we have entered a new economic
era, that of post-liberalism. First, the beginning of recognition by
President Bush at the UN podium of the economic and social origins of
terrorism and, in Louisiana, of the existence of \"persistent poverty\"
and a failure of the federal state in the paragon country of liberalism.
It is now clear that economic freedom does not spontaneously generate
social progress. Then, the publication of the UN report on economic
development in Africa, which questions the intellectual facility of
imposing the opening of economies as a prerequisite for development, and
the very effectiveness of foreign direct investment before recommending
instead in these countries a strengthening of the role of public
authorities. Finally, the global awareness of the end of inexhaustible
and cheap energy, which should shake up many economic models. Only five
years ago, the economy seemed to conclude the history of the world. Our
theologian of liberalism, Pascal Salin, dogmatized that \"globalization,
if it actually contributed to the destruction of nation states, would be
a benefit for humanity.\" The German philosopher Jürgen Habermas was
quite alone in daring to emphasize \"that one of the great conquests of
the nation state is to have established an abstract form of solidarity
between citizens to whom life reserves no direct contact,\" calling for
a European patriotism on this point. Since then, the utopia of a
self-enriched and pacified world through the liberalization of markets
has been ruined by the shipwreck of the \"new economy,\" in terrorism
and in uncertainty in the face of the social consequences of economic
disorders, brought about by the rise of new players such as China, India
or Brazil. The collective unconscious has already taken this development
into account: unlike the previous ones, neither the last campaign for
the European elections nor that of the referendum gave rise to a debate
on European federalism; no questioning either about the nationality of
companies when it comes to discussing the takeovers of some or the risk
of takeover bids on others. Political decision-makers have also
integrated behaviors adapted to this post-liberalism. Like Nicolas
Sarkozy, then Minister of Economy and Finance, when he defended Alstom
in Brussels and supported Sanofi in its takeover bid for Aventis or
Dominique de Villepin who invited the French to \"economic patriotism\".
In their successive functions, both have moreover outlined a public
policy of economic intelligence, created a new industrial policy with
companies, linked to a research policy, and set up \"competitiveness
clusters\" intended to catalyze regional initiatives. On the left too,
those who take into account the reality of the world agree to challenge
taboos, like Dominique Strauss-Kahn who dared, furtively, to speak out
in favor of a \"social VAT\" or Yves Cochet whose speech on the
consequences of the end of oil is far from any soothing demagogy. Thus
the model that our American partner has been building for more than
thirty years - long-term strategy, association of the economic
development interests of companies and those of the State, protection of
what is part of \"national security\" - is gradually taking shape in
France as in the rest of the world. We are obviously forced to do so.
The new interdependence between States and between economic zones, like
the arrival of new players in the political and economic fields (IGOs,
NGOs) or the confrontation with global problems (environment, public
health) force us to think of new solutions. An invisible link connects
Toyota\'s hybrid car and the tax proposed by Jacques Chirac on airline
tickets: these are post-liberal solutions. The dinosaurs still need to
be tamed. Some of them, who cannot be suspected of incompetence, remain
blind to the changing world. Thus, and to take just this recent example,
the European Commissioner for Competition, Nelly Kroes, is getting
carried away by what she considers to be a return to protectionism by
France. If it were a question of responding to the admittedly
inopportune initiative of a French minister, it would have been
necessary to first observe the good practices in this area of our
partners and competitors. Thus, for twenty years, the CFIUS (Committee
on Foreign Investments in the United States) has had the mission of
analyzing and possibly prohibiting foreign equity investments in
American companies, based solely on the criterion of \"national
security\" that no text defines! We could also credit this great country
with the creation of an Advocacy Center supporting American companies in
conquering markets, the proximity of government circles to major
investment funds, or the generous public funding provided to promote
information highways, nanotechnologies, weapons programs, etc. The
European texts to which Neelie Kroes refers are now obsolete. If we
remain immobile, France and Europe will tomorrow be nothing more than a
vast holiday zone, without jobs or a future. We must demand for Europe
and its member states equal treatment between global trading powers and
respect for fair competition. \"European economic security\" must be
taken into account in modernized texts. In France too, we must convince
people that the urgent need is not to think about a sixth Republic, the
preserve of a few navel-gazers sheltered behind a status or a mandate.
Our generation has the responsibility to adapt our country to new
worlds. In addition to the projects that have been undertaken and that
must be completed, three debates deserve to be opened as a priority: the
overhaul of our indirect taxation, the debate on \"social VAT\" which,
according to some, would allow us to reduce production costs and
re-establish a fair balance with countries with low labor costs; the
management of the end of oil (and more generally of other resources and
raw materials) in five, ten or twenty years, it will call into question
our lifestyles and, if we are not careful, could double the economic
disorder with social disorder; the reduction of the digital divide by a
wider use of free software, particularly in training and education. It
is to talk about the future with courage that we need in the political
debate and not to repeat hackneyed dogmas. Bernard Carayon, MP (UMP) for
Tarn.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1625

This may be the TV of the future. An ultra-specialized show for a niche
audience. In any case, tech columnist Robert Cringely has just launched
NerdTV, a 100% nerd show. Each week, NerdTV offers an interview (in
English) with a guest from the world of technology. Andy Hertzfeld, the
first Macintosh programmer, inaugurates the concept; he talks about his
love at first sight for open source software. The show is published
under Creative Commons, allowing everyone to share or edit their own
versions. www.pbs.org /cringely/nerdtv Flying Panda
www.donpixel.com/play/en /050804104307/

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1626

\"Don\'t watch TV, do it!\" On June 21, 2002, Orfeo TV broadcast for the
first time on channel 51 in a neighborhood in downtown Bologna. A weak,
almost symbolic signal, limited to three streets. You could see the
locals expressing their opinions on what they expected from an
independent local television. With a makeshift video transmitter, some
salvaged electronic equipment, a few amateur cameras and a handful of
motivated people, Orfeo TV, which takes its name from the street from
which it broadcasts, demonstrated that with very little money (1,000
euros), you could create your own micro-TV station and take back the
floor in an Italian media landscape monopolized by Berlusconi. Their
credo: to reinject a little \"biodiversity\" into the surrounding
monoculture. Shadow cones. \"In Italy,\" explains Ciro, one of the
founders met at the Austrian festival of electronic cultures Ars
Electronica (Libération, September 5, 2005), where the project has just
been awarded a prize (1), \"public television is subservient to the
government and political parties, ordinary citizens do not have the
right to communicate.\" Orfeo TV has set up in one of the thousands of
\"shadow cones\", an area where the signal from large transmitters does
not reach due to obstacles (buildings, mountains, etc.), so as not to
disturb commercial channels. In Bologna, it occupies a shadow cone of
MTV, which does not prevent it from being considered illegal. \"We felt
a bit like the landless people of television, we set up on wasteland,
abandoned, and we breathe life back into this place.\" Orfeo TV becomes
a bustling meeting point and a channel for broadcasting all independent
productions, from documentaries to animations, including clips and art
videos. Hosted by documentary filmmakers, media activists, philosophers,
and individuals, the tele di strada attracts young people like Annalisa,
a PhD student who does a bit of everything at Orfeo TV (like most
people): publishing, live TV shows, etc. \"I had never touched a camera
in my video classes, it was a pro who filmed. At Orfeo, it was just the
opposite, they put the camera in your hands and figure it out for
yourself.\" The experience gradually contaminates all of Italy, the
telestreets begin to proliferate in an anarchic manner. \"One of the
first,\" says Ciro, \"appeared in Sicily within a workers\' movement to
protest against the closure of a Fiat factory, led by a dismissed
worker, and stopped by the police.\" Others appeared in Milan, Rome
(with the very active Candida TV, a group of videographers, artists and
activists), Padua, Naples, Gaeta, Calabria where the church served as a
studio, and Parma, launched by priests. At the height of the movement,
there were nearly 200 pirate TVs. One of the most spectacular actions
carried out by the Roman telestreets associated with the Guerrilla
Marketing activists was the reappropriation of football match
broadcasts, confiscated by Sky TV. Murdoch\'s private channel had bought
the rights to the biggest matches of the season, forcing fans to take
out a subscription. The telestreets intercepted the encrypted signal of
the Roma-Juventus match to broadcast it free of charge to the public in
San Lorenzo, the student district of Rome. But not all the experiences
were so happy. Disco Volante, a TV made by disabled people in
Senigallia, which won a local journalism award for Barriere (a film
about the difficulty of access), was closed down by the police, who
sealed their transmitter for a year and a half. \"They started a
procedure that they have just won, but the episode discouraged more than
one person,\" admits Ciro. National network. The success of telestreet
is due to their ability to combine traditional media and new media,
micro-local and global. A website allows all these isolated stations to
be connected, people can contact each other, get information, technical
support. In December 2002, the first national meeting took place between
the various players from media activism, free information, communication
and independent production. On February 21, 2003, the first major
collective transmission was organized on the eve of the war in Iraq.
Telestreet then approached Newglobalvision, the first open-access video
archive launched in 2001 after the tragic events of the G8 in Genoa.
This collaborative database collects and distributes independent videos
on the Net (covering in particular local events and demonstrations
ignored by the mainstream media) via peer-to-peer networks. One of the
major concerns of telestreet being to feed their program schedule daily,
NGV allows pirate TV stations scattered throughout Italy to pool their
productions (under Creative Commons), download a clip, a film, a
documentary, an interview and broadcast it to their local audience and
vice versa. With the Digital Communities prize awarded by the Ars, they
hope to launch a national web TV to further strengthen ties. (1) Award
of distinction, Digital Communities category, tied with the
FreeSoftwareFoundation project. - Online catch-up session for those who
couldn\'t make it to Linz in Austria, where the 26th edition of the Ars
Electronica festival of electronic cultures ended on Tuesday. - Podcasts
from the exciting symposium Hybrid: living in paradox. www.aec.at/de
/festival2005/podcasts/podcasts.asp. - Blogs
http://pieceoplastic.com/index.php?cat=26. www.we-make-money-not-art.com
/archives/cat_ars_electronica. php. - Wiki
www.web-laun.ch/ars2005/index.php/Bloggers
\_Mobloggers_Wikis_Socialbookmarks

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1627

Microsoft filed a new appeal on August 10 before the Court of First
Instance of the European Court of Justice (ECJ) against the European
Commission, which found it guilty in March 2004 of abuse of a dominant
position. According to a Microsoft spokesman in Brussels, the new appeal
is the legal consequence of a decision taken in June by the European
Commission on the issue of free software.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1628

Microsoft continues to contest its conviction for abuse of a dominant
position by the European Commission: the world\'s number one software
company has filed a new appeal against the March 2004 decision,
targeting one of the \"corrective measures\" required to restore
competition. Microsoft refuses to distribute certain parts of its
\"source code\" (the manufacturing secrets of Windows) to publishers of
free software. (AFP)

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1629

In third world countries, the next school year could well be digital.
MIT, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, is launching a colossal
project, in partnership with emerging countries such as Brazil and
Thailand, to bring computers to schools everywhere. The project is
called One Laptop Per Child. It is led by Professor Nicholas Negroponte,
one of MIT\'s bigwigs. It is an ambitious project that has led to the
design of a computer that can be purchased for less than \$100 each.
Millions of units will be manufactured. Mr. Negroponte told La Presse
that the computer will be unveiled on November 15, at the World Summit
on the Information Society in Tunis. In fact, the MIT laboratory has
developed a device that will cost \$90 but will be sold for \$100 to
governments of countries interested in the project. The \$10 profit will
be used for charity. Building a low-cost computer is easy, according to
the MIT team. \"You have to remove the excess in the systems. Today,
computers have become obese,\" says Mr. Negroponte. He adds that when
you eliminate the margins taken for marketing, you save more than 50% on
the price of a microcomputer. In addition, the \$100 computer will use
the free Linux software. The professor denies having designed a computer
that is poorly suited to harsh environments. The screen will be readable
in direct sunlight and the components will be particularly robust. A
hand-cranked computer Aware that the majority of African homes do not
have electricity, the MIT team has solved the energy problem by
developing a device whose batteries are rechargeable using a dynamo. By
turning a crank, the user powers the energy circuit of his computer!
While it is unlikely that every schoolchild on the planet will have a
laptop in the short term, the One Laptop per Child project should help
bridge the digital divide in many countries. Brazilian President Lula
has shown great interest and is expected to give the green light to the
production of 2 million devices, Mr. Negroponte estimates. The new
technology specialist told La Presse that several other nations,
including Thailand, are interested in the American initiative,
particularly because the devices are portable. \"Desktop computers are
less expensive to make than laptops, but mobility is important,
especially when it comes to taking the computer home at night so the
whole family can enjoy it,\" Professor Negroponte emphasizes. FOR
\$100\... The \$100 laptop will be equipped with Linux, a 500 MHz
processor and a 1 GB hard drive, as well as Wi-Fi capabilities and USB
ports. The 12-inch screen will be in color

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1630

(special correspondent in Linz) He must have been pedaling on the spot
for an hour, sweating in his cycling suit. Next to this sporty old man,
a dandy, cigarette in mouth, does the same, although at a slower speed,
a dilettante in a skirt is content with a turn of the wheel. The watts
rise to the rhythm of the cheeks that turn pink under the effort, a
final thrust of the hips and, at 10 p.m., the moon floating above the
central square of Linz lights up, thanks to the energy accumulated by
the strength of the calves of the hundreds of cyclists who took turns
all afternoon. A large human battery that made it possible to light up
the square for\... an hour. Needless to say, it would have taken a lot
of people to supply electricity to the entire Ars Electronica, the
oldest electronic arts festival that is taking place until this evening
in every corner of the Austrian city, including the most unexpected. On
Friday evening, a commando action led by the New Yorkers from the
Graffiti Research Lab (1) transformed the tram into a multi-coloured
garland. An overexcited crowd threw handfuls of light-emitting diodes
(LEDs) attached to batteries and magnets that stuck to the metal
carriages. The GRL hacktivists are proposing an extension of street art
through new technologies (LED Throwies, electrograf, mobile urban
projection): a \"graffiti 2.0\" to compete with commercial signs and
reclaim public space. The approach is \"open source\", encouraging
everyone to make their own tools. A simple and participatory approach in
line with the paradoxical title of this edition, \"Simplicity - the art
of complexity\". \"Isn\'t it strange that we are constantly developing
new technologies that are supposed to simplify our lives and work, and
that in the end we have the impression that everything has become so
much more complicated?\" asks Gerfried Stocker, director of the
festival. For twenty-seven years, he has been examining the impact of
technologies on the arts, culture and society, echoing a growing
technophobia, and more generally the nostalgia for a simpler life. In
this society dominated by technical revolutions and global networks, and
drowning in information, a certain discouragement is growing, the desire
to let go. Or even pounding a hammer on the computer keyboard in anger,
an option also available at the festival with the Sledgehammer Keyboard
installation, where you could literally hit your frustrating experiences
on a giant latex keyboard connected to a screen (2). "Paradox." To guide
the novice on the complex path to simplicity, the Ars had invited the
American guru of digital design, John Maeda, professor at the
prestigious Media Lab of MIT (Massachusetts Institute of Technology).
The artist, who also presented his soothing abstract digital paintings,
Nature, has just released a book, The Laws of Simplicity, compiling his
observations (3). "We are trapped in this paradox, wanting something
that is easy to use, but that does every complex thing imaginable." His
first commandment is "reduce." A recipe that has been successfully
applied by the iPod and Google, as well as Walter Bender, who initiated
the \"One laptop per child\" project, which aims to design a robust and
inexpensive computer (less than \$100), but equipped with all the
essential functions in order to equip the billion school-age children in
developing countries. \"The goal is not to eliminate the complexity of
the world, but to create a tool that allows us to confront it more
simply,\" he noted during the symposium. Complexity is often a question
of point of view. In the basement of the Brucknerhaus, it does not seem
to put off the young people who come to participate in the various
workshops, handling the soldering iron, electronic components and
computer code to create interactive musical instruments or program
software for mobile phones. \"We need to constantly update our
knowledge. The \"Do it yourself\" philosophy, inherited from hacker
culture, is spreading across the Internet and is providing a number of
online guides that are as easy to apply as cooking recipes,\" says
workshop organizer David Cuartielles. Simplicity of access was the
dominant feature of most of the installations presented at the festival.
Visitors could lie down and shiver in Kaffe Mathews\' bed, massaged by
sound vibrations, creating intense sensations and a unique listening
experience. Exonemo combines the ancestral art of folding and the latest
geolocation techniques in his poetic Roadmovie. The same purity is found
in Paul DeMarinis, who revisits the archaeology of communication through
a subtle metaphor in The Messenger, an installation connected to the
Internet that is inspired by the electric telegraph. Emails from all
four corners of the planet are dissected letter by letter by three
fanciful receivers. One consists of 26 chamber pots that spell out the
letters in as many different voices, the second of 26 skeletons hanging
from gibbets wearing ponchos stamped A to Z and who quiver in a
grotesque danse macabre each time a letter is activated. Finally, 26
bottles each containing a metal letter that make bubbles when the
current passes. Impossible to reconstruct or understand the message
transmitted that comes to die here. An ironic reference to the thousands
of insignificant messages that have become our daily lot. Goldfish. This
unenviable fate is also illustrated by the hysterical installation of
the Techart Group, Office Live, which delivers a sarcastic commentary on
repetitive office life. A high-tech \"domino effect\" where the entire
production line is automated and activated by\... a goldfish. To help
festival-goers find peace, Ars Electronica organized a pastoral trip to
the sumptuous baroque monastery of St Florian. Between a Japanese
archery session, an origami workshop and a concert on a stunning
14-string instrument 10 meters long, the audience gave a rock star
welcome to Toshio Iwai, the father of the cult musical game
Electroplankton, a digital magician who presented his new optical
illusion machine Morphovision (4). (1) www.graffitiresearchlab. com (2)
www.taylorhokanson.com (3) www.lawsofsimplicity.com (4)
www.nhk.or.jp/strl/ morphovision www.aec.at/en/festival2006

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1631

Taking risks doesn\'t always pay off. Yet that\'s the bet that the
artists and researchers at the Société des arts technologiques (SAT)
have set themselves, launching their fall programming last night. After
a tough year marked by enormous financial problems, the city\'s only
digital art centre is once again announcing a period of fragmented
transition with an expansion of its premises, a new general director and
the most diverse programming in its short history. The organization
dedicated to networking the arts, industry and research in the new
technology sector has announced that it will take possession of the
second floor of its building on Saint-Laurent Boulevard (diagonally from
the Monument-National) in October. Integrated into its \"urban hub\"
project that includes a very high-speed global network (100 megabits per
second, 50 times faster than residential high-speed), this floor will be
devoted to a new training and research project in which the Université
de Montréal has already expressed interest. The SAT had purchased its
current building at great expense last year following the eviction of
its premises on the Balmoral block where the provincial government had
announced the construction of the new OSM performance hall, which
ultimately never saw the light of day. In addition to an expansion of
its research sector, this transition must be accompanied by new
self-financing tools, the new general director of the SAT, André Picard,
stressed to La Presse. This former employee of IMAX theatres and the NFB
wants the SAT to benefit from its expertise in technological creation:
\"We must establish our model for exploiting knowledge and expertise
while maintaining the artistic and research movement. We have developed
several software and technological applications that are almost ready to
be widely distributed and we want to benefit from them while keeping in
mind the ideology of free software.\" André Picard takes Louis
Bellemare\'s place as general director. Louis Bellemare had been hired,
among other things, to redress the organization\'s difficult financial
situation following its move. The SAT\'s best calling card, however,
remains its venue, which presents a continuous series of shows all fall
long. Several major players are back, such as the MEG festival, the
weekly SAT \"MisSessions\" evenings, which are enhanced by a rebroadcast
on 101.5 Radio-Montréal, the Néon events, the Ligue d\'improvisation
hip-hop du Québec and the technOpéra series in collaboration with the
Opéra de Montréal. Also worth noting is a new collaboration with the
Audiogram record label, which will offer the launches of all its fall
albums, as well as the return, after several years of absence, of the
audiovisual collective Epsilonlab. Marked by the seal of great
diversity, this programming also seems to lack a guiding principle.
Nothing ventured, nothing gained, as the saying goes. And the SAT is
going all out.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1632

Bill Gates tried everything. But Microsoft\'s banks didn\'t give him the
respite he hoped for. Yesterday, the former richest man in the world
emerged unrecognizable from a final negotiation session to announce the
unthinkable: the firm was declaring bankruptcy. It was the culmination
of a decade-long decline, after thirty years of unchallenged domination
of the software sector. \"Microsoft is first and foremost a victim of
its behavior during the 1990s and early 2000s,\" says Morgan Stanley
analyst Franck Epson. \"The company abused its dominant position to
maintain it artificially, to the detriment of innovation and the quality
of its products. All it took was for Google to merge with Linux in 2007
for the model to break up.\" That year, in September, everything moved
quickly. After several postponements, Microsoft finally launched the
successor to Windows XP. Long known under the code name Longhorn,
Windows Vista was initially scheduled for release in 2003. In 2005, it
was scheduled for late 2006. And in 2006 for 2007. But then, on
September 15, Google founders Larry Page and Sergey Brin held a press
conference with Linus Torvalds, the main architect of Linux, about their
merger. They ridiculed Bill Gates (\"The richer he is, the poorer his
products are\"). Never has an announcement generated such excitement in
the history of computing. \"They were so sure of themselves that they
played it modest,\" notes a desperate Microsoft executive. Bill Gates
immediately understands the magnitude of the threat. During his annual
\"week of reflection\" in an isolated house on the Pacific coast, he
tries to come up with a response. But when he returns, some of his
friends find him \"totally depressed.\" Released ten months later, the
competing operating system, Google Linux Desktop, kept all its promises:
combining the search capabilities and ease of use of Google with the
reliability and near-free nature of Linux. \"For the first time, an
operating system becomes invisible to the user, he no longer has to
worry about plumbing,\" rejoiced the IT press. A stripped-down product.
In comparison, the launch of Windows Vista was a flop. By delaying its
launch, Microsoft stripped its product of its main innovations, offered
as add-ons to Windows XP users. Integrated search between hard disk and
Web, which was to be the heart of the new system, had already been
offered separately. \"Microsoft had no choice but to highlight its
progress in terms of security and protection against viruses, but this
argument backfired by highlighting the structural weaknesses of its
previous products,\" observed an industry analyst. Immediately after its
release, Google Linux Desktop gained market share. Windows slips below
90%. The rent system described by Microsoft\'s detractors is stalling.
Until now, the firm derived most of its revenue and profits from the
purchase of new computers. In the mid-1990s, the number of machines in
use worldwide was estimated at 100 million. Ten years later, there were
730 million. For each purchase of a new computer equipped with Windows
(95% of the market), Microsoft collects a royalty. After an average of
five years, a new one is purchased. Such a system has ensured the
firm\'s dominance since it was chosen by IBM to equip its first PC in
1981. Microsoft has been convicted several times for abuse of a dominant
position. It was accused of pressuring PC manufacturers to block any
alternative to Windows. The convictions in the United States in 2000 and
then in Europe in 2004 finally put computer manufacturers at ease. They
lacked an attractive product. With Google Linux Desktop, the craze is
such that the major brands are offering two models, one with Windows,
the other with its competitor. \"Suddenly, people made Microsoft pay for
years of domination and a lack of choice,\" explains Bernard Lang, a
pro-Linux activist from the very beginning. \"They felt like they were
finally free to choose their computing.\" Risky diversifications.
Another decisive argument, the price. The first to benefit from it are
the administrations and companies, which contested the financial burden
of Microsoft software and their updates, always paid for. Previous
versions of Linux had already won over governments and municipalities.
In 2005, the Paris City Hall had considered generalizing Linux on its
employees\' computers. Microsoft had to grant a considerable discount to
keep its market. The same year, the British government, noting that the
public sector had spent 18.3 billion euros on information technology in
2004, created an \"academy\" to encourage the adoption of free software.
Companies do not hesitate for long. In addition to the drop in cost,
Google Linux Desktop offers many advantages over Windows, enhanced
security and transparent communication with portable devices, from
electronic tablets to mobile phones, which executives are equipped with.
It is among the general public that Microsoft retains the most
aficionados, but not enough to remain profitable. The software giant
must resolve to lower its prices. It sees its margins melt away, at the
same time as demand. The group records the first losses in its history
in 2010. It also pays the price of risky diversifications, particularly
in the field of video games where it has never managed to break through
against Sony. When the bankruptcy was announced, the Bill Gates friends
club, created a year ago to support the founder of the company, stressed
that \"recent events should not make us forget his tremendous
contribution to global computing.\" A contribution contested by its many
detractors, who believe that Microsoft\'s success was based on bluffing
and anti-competitive practices, rather than technological superiority.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1633

Washington from our correspondent Google, Google, Google\... In Silicon
Valley or on Wall Street, we hear nothing but this incessant gurgling,
everyone wondering about the projects of Larry Page and Serguei Brin\'s
firm. Not a week goes by without a new announcement. Last Thursday, the
company announced that it was going to raise 4 billion dollars (3.26
billion euros) on the market (for what purpose? Mum\'s the word).
Yesterday morning, it launched Google Talk, an instant messaging service
(competitor of AOL, Microsoft\'s MSN, Yahoo\...) and Internet telephony
(competitor of Skype, 51 million users). Google Talk is currently
reserved for Internet users with a Gmail address: to obtain it, you just
have to be co-opted by another user. In less than a year, Google\'s
image has completely changed, going from the friendly start-up to the
worrying big corporation. In the Internet sector, everyone is trembling.
The only one who has good reason to relax is Bill Gates because, as the
New York Times puts it, it is now Google\'s turn to be the \"bad guy.\"
Without fanfare. Until now, Google has vowed to stay true to its core
business, searching and storing data on the Internet. But even though it
was launched yesterday without fanfare, Google Talk represents a new
step in the race for the Mountain View (near San Francisco) firm. For
the first time, it is setting foot in the telephony territory. Like
Skype and others, Google Talk allows Internet users to talk to each
other live, via their computer. Touting its audio technology, it
promises to do better than the competition in terms of sound quality
(the sound quality found in Skype is already impressive). As for its
instant messaging, Google Talk is based on open source technology
(freely modifiable). The group aims to be a \"rallying point\" and to
help create a \"massive instant messaging network,\" said George Harik,
the company\'s director of new products. Ad. Eventually, Google Talk is
expected to offer a service that lets you call your friends directly on
their landlines or mobile phones. Communication is one of the sectors
that Google is most likely to be interested in, as it thrives on the
interaction between free services and advertising. One could imagine
that one day anyone who clicks on an ad would receive free long-distance
phone minutes. Or that, on your computer screen, the advertising would
automatically adapt to the content of the discussion you\'ve started via
instant messaging: you talk about the recent Stones concert, and the ad
for their latest album appears\... So there is much speculation about
what Google intends to do with the \$3 billion (2.44 billion euros) it
has in its coffers and the \$4 billion it is about to rake in. Some are
already predicting the purchase of Skype, the small company that
threatens the telephone dinosaurs. Its founders recently rejected a \$3
billion takeover offer from Rupert Murdoch\'s News Corp.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1634

True virtual extensions of the classroom, Internet portals have been
gradually being implemented in school boards for three years. Each
student and teacher is given a user name and code that allow them to
access a site adapted to their needs. No matter where you connect, you
can access your email, a chat site (which generally works in the
presence of the teacher), your calendar, teachers\' instructions,
bookmarks of sites relevant to the training, banks of articles from the
main daily newspapers, etc. Students save their work there, which can
then be retrieved by teammates or by the teacher when it is time to
correct it. However, the implementation is happening at a fairly slow
pace. \"This reaches between 2 and 10% of the schools in a school board.
This may not seem like a lot, but school boards would not be able to
provide the support needed for all their schools to launch the portal at
the same time; \"They are therefore gradually penetrating,\" explains
Pierre Delisle of the Société de Gestion des réseaux informatisés des
commissions scolaires. The tool developed by this company, which is
partly funded by a contribution from the school boards, is distributed
to 25 school boards, which pay an additional contribution to use the
portal. Three school boards on the North Shore and Laval have also
joined forces to develop their own portal, Projet Mille, which uses
open-source software. \"We are trying to develop Linux terminals with
old devices, to be able to put more of them in our schools,\" explains
Claude Raymond, educational advisor at the Commission scolaire
Seigneurie des Mille-Îles. Some computers are so outdated that they can
no longer support recent commercial applications. The hope is to recover
new vehicles from the school boards\' computer fleet. \"With the portal,
we are trying to develop work by community, with discussion groups,\"
continues Mr. Raymond. Reluctant parents This type of approach does not
always go smoothly with parents, who sometimes have a red light go off
when they hear the word \"chat.\" During his first meeting with the
parents of his Grade 6 class last year, Jocelyn Dion was surprised to
see their distrust. \"Many of them felt that chat had no place in
teaching. We had to clarify things,\" recalls Mr. Dion, who was quick to
tell them that chatting was only done between students in the class.
\"Parents see the Internet more as a source of access to illicit
information,\" continues the teacher, who led a special computer-based
learning project last year. He notes that the range of sites accessible
to students is limited for the youngest and is expanding every year. In
the sixth grade, they have access to the entire Web, says the teacher,
who works to raise awareness among young people about the different
types of content that can be found there and explains how to assess its
reliability. The teacher at Les Lucioles elementary school on the North
Shore uses the Internet for various school subjects: what better way to
understand a Cartesian map than to look for coordinates on a
computerized map, or to work on French and history than to research the
major events of the 20th century using Internet sites? His students\'
work is then posted on the Web. \"There are projects that I would never
have been able to do on such a large scale without computers,\" notes
the teacher, who has witnessed a surge in motivation among the students.
Successes The former principal of the private elementary school Institut
Saint-Joseph, Mario Asselin, also gets animated when he talks about the
successes of young people on the Internet. For example, last year a
student posted a review of a fantasy book (Amos D\'Aragon) on the school
website, entitled \"my favorite novel.\" Six days later, the author of
the novel, Bryan Perro, came to write a comment in turn. \"It was the
first time that the students said \"it\'s true that anyone can read
us!\" It made the young people hungry for knowledge. It encouraged them
to want to write better and better: they know that they are read,\" the
director enthusiastically recounts, emphasizing that the students have
even started to publish texts outside the school setting, for fun.
Without wanting to make the use of the Internet an end in itself, he
vigorously advocates for schools to take the technological turn: \"The
power of the tool requires that we take an interest in it!\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1635

NEW YORK from our correspondent - The expression \"new economy\",
popularized by Business Week magazine in 1996, today evokes more the
excesses of the speculative bubble of the end of the 20th century and
the illusory promises of prosperity for all and endless growth. The
frenzy of enrichment and naivety have gone up in smoke, but not the
upheavals born of the global networking of consumers, producers and
distributors. In his best-seller published at the beginning of the year
in the United States, The World is Flat, the journalist and writer
Thomas Friedman takes the measure of the impact of information
technologies. He announces the third phase of the world economy. The
first, dates back to the discovery of America in 1492. It is marked by
European expansion and the \"globalization of States\". The second, from
1800 to 2000, is characterized by the \"globalization of companies\",
the birth and apogee of multinationals. The third stage has just begun.
It is the \"globalization of people. They can collaborate like never
before and compete all over the world. The engine is no longer muscle
and machines, but software and the global fiber optic network.\" Pierre
Omidyar, founder of the online auction house eBay, makes a similar
analysis. \"We are seeing a fundamental shift in power,\" he says.
\"People everywhere are coming together using the Internet and changing
the activities in which they are involved.\" Just a decade ago, you had
to call your bank to check your account, stamp an envelope to send mail,
and read your newspaper or watch TV to get the football scores and the
weather forecast. Today, according to a study by the Pew Internet &
American Life Project, two out of three Americans do this much faster
online. In December 2004, 58 million Americans sent at least one email a
day, and 35 million made the Internet their primary source of
information. Some 2 billion searches are made each month via Google; at
the same time, the site of its competitor Yahoo! is consulted by 345
million people. Nearly 1 billion human beings have access to the
network. The tip of the iceberg of the new economy is online commerce.
Two companies, eBay and Amazon, have made the Internet a growing part of
world commerce. Online sales in the United States reached 6.5% of retail
sales in 2004. According to Forrester Research, this rate could reach
13% in 2010. The community of eBay users worldwide represents 157
million individuals, of whom 500,000 in the United States have made it
their main professional activity. The value of auctions on eBay is
expected to reach 45 billion dollars (36.6 billion euros) this year. On
a more traditional commerce model, Amazon has 41 million customers in
seven countries. Online music and piracy have exploded, undermining
record companies. Legal and paid, the Apple Music Store has sold more
than 500 million songs in two years. In the information field, the
Internet threatens the supremacy and future of traditional media,
particularly written media. A NECESSITY The least visible part of the
transformations, those that affect the functioning of companies, their
organization, their strategies, is undoubtedly the most serious in
consequences. Companies can now both address the world and adapt locally
to each market. Competition is increased tenfold. The ability to
collect, process and exploit information, to work in a network, to
provide personalized service to customers, while taking advantage of the
benefits of large-scale production, is becoming a necessity to remain
competitive. The use of electronic media for information exchanges
between suppliers, subcontractors, customers, service providers and
financial institutions has become widespread. This translates into an
unprecedented acceleration of productivity gains. Between the 1970s and
1990s, labor productivity in the United States increased by an average
of 1.4% per year. Since 1995, it has increased by 2.5%, and by 4% since
2001. The MIT (Massachusetts Institute of Technology) research center on
the new economy highlights the very different strategies of companies.
Some are content to eliminate certain tasks. Others, the most
successful, completely change their organization and give employees the
information and responsibilities they need so that they can regain
control at any time. Proof of the newfound faith in the new economy is
found in the return of utopias. In its August issue devoted to \"The Ten
Years That Changed the World,\" Wired magazine notes with satisfaction
that \"less than half the Web is commercial; the rest runs on passion.\"
It cites as an example the phenomenon of blogs, 50 million of which
\"appeared almost instantly and have no economic logic.\" Yochai
Benkler, a Yale professor specializing in network economics, believes
that online collaboration is creating a new mode of production that is
different from the traditional relationship between companies and the
market. He cites open source software, online data sharing, and the
millions of consumer ratings that are accessible on websites as
examples. \"The economic role of social behavior is becoming more
important,\" he says.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1636

JEAN DE CHAMBURE is the editorial manager of Atelier, a BNP Paribas
structure that has been monitoring information and communication
technologies for fifteen years. The general public Internet is ten years
old. Have we come out of the phase of fantasies and disillusionment? The
powerful collective euphoria of the late 1990s around the prospects of
the Internet would be a good subject of study for historians. Could
there be a millenarian phenomenon? In the year 1000, catastrophic
scenarios about the future of the planet proliferated; in the year 2000,
equally passionate positivist predictions about an enchanting high-tech
future developed. Moreover, while the generation of young people in the
1970s expressed themselves in political protest, their children saw in
the Internet the opportunity to shake up the economic order: instead of
the people overthrowing the government, agile mini-companies would
dethrone large groups. There was a libertarian ideology in the Internet,
where everything was free, and cyber-companies were more concerned with
innovating than making money. Hasn\'t the Internet lost some of the
magic of its beginnings? Certainly, business on the Internet has become
an important economic activity and the myth of everything free has
lived. However, the Internet has given more power to each individual:
everyone can be as well informed as a journalist, trade on the other
side of the world like a multinational, share their files with those of
millions of others to create a giant database\... Its power to bring
people together has created forms of collective work, even bartering and
mutual aid: the best known is the brotherhood of free software
programmers around Linux, which makes Microsoft tremble. On eBay, people
buy objects from strangers with the only guarantee being the online
ratings of previous buyers on the seller\'s reliability. Thousands of
experts on this or that subject voluntarily write the 200 million
articles of the free, multilingual online encyclopedia Wikipedia. What
is the main societal impact of the Internet? It was feared that the
Internet would keep people behind their computers: they would work
online, consume online, spend all their leisure time online. But the
Internet is a fantastic means of communication. Email remains the
primary use of the Web. Instant messaging, discussion forums, community
and dating sites, blogs: in fact our modern societies have a thirst for
expression, for information. The diversity, the accessibility of
content, to which everyone can contribute, is a great wealth. But beware
of leveling. The main problem of the Net, which explains the importance
taken by search engines, remains the sorting, the prioritization, the
relevance of these billions of Web pages.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1637

In other times, \"I\'ve heard about\...\" would have been revolutionary.
In times of global uncertainty and the crisis of Western democracies, it
is better to speak of heresy, a term identified from the statement of
the firm that made the proposal, R & Sie. At the Cordeliers convent,
architects François Roche, Stéphanie Lavaux, Jean Navarro and Benoît
Durandin free themselves from anything that might, from near or far,
resemble a rule. Starting with the scenography, which has been
sidelined: \"I\'ve heard about\...\" squats on the previous proposal by
Rirkrit Tiravanija, who reconstructed on a scale the Museum of Modern
Art of the City of Paris (under construction) inside the Cordeliers
convent (Libération, February 23). François Roche and his acolytes
insert their \"urban speculation\" into it, grafting a honeycomb
protuberance onto it, half limestone cave, half Cheval\'s postman\'s
house. No model either, even fewer images and plans of the Parisian
firm\'s achievements, better known for its projects beyond our borders,
in Bangkok or Trinidad, than for its French achievements, a question of
inadequacy to the French architectural climate. State of mind. The
rumor, an architectural fiction in a prototypical state that R & Sie
proposes, is first read as a state of mind. And since the project is not
the simplest, the only way to grasp its content is to push bodies to
experiment with it. When the mind balks at the speculations of a city in
a perpetual state of uncertainty, never fixed or finished, where
architecture would self-generate according to internal and external
stimuli (mood of the inhabitants, climate and economy, etc.), \"bodies
know how to speak,\" says Roche. Are you lost? Precisely, the
\"immersion room\" welcomes you: inside this polyurethane foam cave
\"clogged with concrete resin\", five smooth white cells await visitors
to curl up and listen to the warm, whispering voice of François
Roustang, Lacan\'s hypnotist\... \"Echappée belle\". \"You are at the
heart of the situation, this strange silky sensation that frightens and
caresses you\... The city is an extension of your own body, you are one
of the nerve endings of this body that is a city\...\" Asleep or
softened, the bodies pass back in front of the sculptural objects in the
form of stalagmites, enigmatic white underwater concretions with
abstruse titles (\"random reticulated structure\",
\"psychochemistry\"\...) to perceive this sensual environment
differently, where a little girl sings \"let\'s walk in the woods\". For
Roche, this inner journey is a \"great escape, a transdoor\", a dream
directed to apprehend this bioarchitecture. This city is also a joyful
mix of the most recent philosophical concepts. The Territorial Protocol
that ensures its cohesion is a term borrowed from Peter Sloterdijk. And
when the whole could fall into an indigestible mille-feuille, a touch of
humor is thrown in. The Protocol is printed with ink that fades above 16
°C, \"a bodily mode that prevents the architect\'s words from being
engraved in stone\". It is also a pure product of collective
intelligence: architects, art critics, philosophers, mathematicians,
biochemists and science fiction writers have contributed to it. Recent
developments in robotics and biotechnologies are found there. The
machine for constantly building architecture is not just a hypothesis.
It was developed by Behrokh Khoshnevis, a researcher at the University
of Southern California, \"a robot that shits viscous concrete and clay
material, producing both an external membrane for the walls and a
formwork,\" says Roche. All that remains is to inject into it the
variables that would make Viab (for \"variability-viability\", a
neologism by Bruce Sterling) a real biostructure, via algorithms
calculating and combining in real time a set of parameters (structural
limits, light input, cell thickness, local biotope, bodily emissions,
stress level of the inhabitants, etc.). A \"ten-year research project,\"
with robotics specialists or nanotechnology researchers from the CNRS in
Grenoble. A bet. These speculations turn the dirigiste conception of
urban planning upside down. They announce the disappearance of the
architect and his client as city makers, designing their totem buildings
from above without going through negotiation. They also mark a serious
evolution of non-standard architecture, sketching out, in particular by
opening the source code of Viab, in a free software way, a collective
cooperative architecture\... This bet on the future is invigorating:
\"We all scared ourselves in the 20th century,\" says François Roche.
\"We know that technologies can produce barbarity, but doubts and
uncertainties must not prevent us from moving forward, from taking the
risk of conflict.\" For those who still doubt, R & Sie invites us to
Antwerp in February 2006 to study \"the possible degeneration\" of I\'ve
heard about\...

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1638

This science fiction article is not born of imagination. It projects
into the near future the trends and programs already launched in 2005.
WHEN Vincent wakes up, he doesn\'t feel very well. He partied last night
and his head is still spinning. He gropes for his PDA (personal digital
assistant), the small, flat, flexible computer that never leaves his
side, and simply says \"breathalyzer\". Immediately, the PDA sends a
request to the sensors integrated into the fabric of his T-shirt, which
transmit his pulse and blood alcohol level in one second. The data is
sent for analysis to a specialized server that returns its results in a
few seconds: nothing serious. The PDA still searches the Internet for
some dietary advice: in this summer of 2030, computer-assisted dietetics
are all the rage. Audrey, Vincent\'s friend, wakes up in turn. She
didn\'t go out yesterday because she was sick recently. To monitor her
health precisely, she had a set of micro-sensors implanted in her arm,
coupled with a transceiver, which fit into a capsule the size of a grain
of rice. Every hour, the sensors automatically perform a small check-up.
The results are stored in the capsule\'s memory - which contains
Audrey\'s complete medical file - then they are transmitted to her PDA,
which displays them so she can read them. Finally, they are sent to the
computer at her doctor\'s office. If the computer judges the numbers to
be alarming, the doctor will be alerted in person. While drinking his
coffee, Vincent tries to remember what he did last night. His memories
are hazy, but it doesn\'t matter, because the PDA, which he had hung
around his neck, recorded everything on video. Besides, all the guests
had a PDA on them. The images of the evening are already circulating on
the Internet. The audio files of his conversations will be easy to find,
several search engines must have indexed them word for word. On second
thought, Vincent doesn\'t really want to know what he might have said
last night and orders his PDA to search the Internet for a video of a
football match played the day before yesterday in Brazil. As soon as it
finds it, the device transmits the images to the electronic paper
covering a wall in the kitchen, which turns into a giant screen. In the
living room, Audrey prefers to watch an amateur concert broadcast live
from a small hall in Tokyo, because it\'s evening there. She watches the
images on the living room table, the top of which is a screen: these new
table-screens are found almost everywhere, because they cost less than a
solid wood table. Audrey, who plays a little guitar, asks the orchestra
if she can join them, and a little impromptu jam session begins. Like
most people in rich countries, Vincent and Audrey live partly on the
Internet, but they no longer pay attention to it. Wherever they go, they
are surrounded by devices connected to the network twenty-four hours a
day. The Net has melted into the urban landscape, becoming both
invisible and omnipresent. To the general public, it has taken the form
of a very high-speed wireless local area network. Behind the scenes, it
operates thanks to robotic routers and millions of kilometers of optical
fibers buried in the ground of every continent or laid on the ocean
floor, which carry data streams to local wireless systems. In the course
of its expansion, it has smoothly swallowed up telephone, radio,
television, and surveillance-maintenance networks. It is used as much to
link two machines installed in the same building as to communicate with
spacecraft. Vincent drives to work. As soon as he gets behind the wheel,
the on-board computer reads him a message from his mechanic, who
receives in real time the data transmitted by the dozens of sensors
monitoring the condition of the car: the brakes need to be redone, the
garage computer suggests an appointment for next week. Entering his
office, Vincent, who works in an architectural firm, says hello to his
five colleagues. Two of them are sitting in the room, the other three
are on another continent, but their image is projected life-size on the
office walls. Recently, the occasional videoconferences at a fixed time
have been replaced by \"telepresence\": the team members stay online
from morning to night and talk to each other from time to time as if
they were in the same place. They start working together on the virtual
model of a future building that floats in the middle of the room. At
noon, Audrey decides to go out, and would like to meet Vincent. In order
not to disturb him, she asks her PDA to discreetly locate him. The
device begins to scan the detection networks composed of thousands of
camera-microphones and wireless sensors scattered throughout the city.
In one minute, it spots Vincent in a downtown brasserie. Audrey connects
her PDA to the restaurant\'s video system and sees that Vincent is
sitting at a table with a stranger. She listens to the conversation for
a few moments and guesses that she is an office colleague. To be sure,
she downloads the business card broadcast by the woman\'s PDA and
launches a search on the Net: she obtains her professional CV, a
selection of texts of which she is the author, her vacation photos, and
discovers that she is in the process of divorcing, that she has two
children and a clean criminal record, apart from a few speeding tickets.
Knowing who she is dealing with, Audrey decides to warn Vincent\'s PDA
that she is going to join them. On the way, she makes her choice from
the restaurant menu, which has appeared on her screen, and places her
order. During the meal, Audrey receives a message from her doctor\'s
computer: the last check-up carried out by the sensors implanted in her
arm is not satisfactory, she must go and rest. She leaves the restaurant
quickly. No need to ask for a separate bill: on the way out, the
restaurant\'s detection system has connected to the implant in her arm,
which also contains her bank details. The amount of the meal will be
debited from her account. Back home, Audrey decides to read a little.
She connects her computer to her favorite magazine and finds an article
on a novel that seems interesting to her. She launches a search and, a
second later, the book is purchased and downloaded. If she likes the
novel, she will send it for free to a few friends. Like the majority of
the population, Audrey practices the mix of genres. She regularly
uploads pirated copies of books, music and films, so much so that her
computer now contains millions of works. She doesn\'t really use them,
except to allow others to come and help themselves at her place: now,
the most massive exchanges are between friends and neighbors, by direct
local connection. But, on the other hand, Audrey often makes the effort
to buy the works of her favorite artists, especially those who
self-distribute by bypassing traditional intermediaries. In fact, she
has a hard time finding her way around, because millions of creators put
their works online for free, abandoning the legal protection of
author\'s rights and copyright, which no longer corresponds to the state
of technology. This trend, launched at the end of the 20th century by
authors of free software (open source), gained momentum at the beginning
of the 21st with the trivialization of piracy, the decline of publishers
and distributors entangled in an endless war against their own
customers, and the explosion of the Open Content movement: today, for a
young creator, the goal is to make himself known very quickly throughout
the world by distributing his work on the Net, in the hope of attracting
private sponsors, state subsidies, donations from fan clubs and the
public, invitations to participate in paid events\... Audrey likes to
see and touch real paper books, but resorting to the Net is too tempting
because, recently, the entire content of all the libraries in the world
has been digitized, indexed and available for free online. At the
moment, she is discovering contemporary Korean literature: after decades
of unsuccessful tests, effective instant translation software has
finally been created. In addition, she has become accustomed to reading
enriched and interactive texts on screen, which offer an inexhaustible
depth and variety of information. Since each word of each work is
indexed, one can carry out searches covering the entire world literary
heritage, or all the technical documentation on a given subject. Each
quote can be placed in its original context and its author can be
identified and contacted, if he is still alive. One can also be helped
by intelligent engines capable of understanding the direction of a
search, of finding all the annotations already written about a text and
of autonomously producing summaries, collections of comments,
bibliographies, lists of definitions, etc. This new universe was born
from a technical revolution launched discreetly in the 2000s, and which
has spread over two decades. By the end of the 20th century, computer
scientists had understood that so-called peer-to-peer systems, created
by young autodidacts to exchange music, were the most robust part of the
Net thanks to their horizontal and decentralized architecture, and also
the most efficient, because they managed the available resources in
memory and bandwidth in a rational and dynamic way. It was also the most
egalitarian and creative sector, because every user was both a consumer
and a provider of content. On this basis, a consortium of American
universities and laboratories launched a program called IRIS
(Infrastructure for Resilient Internet Systems), aimed at profoundly
transforming the infrastructure of the Net to make it a fully
peer-to-peer network. Today, centralized servers hosting large masses of
information are disappearing: the content of the Net is scattered
fluidly and invisibly in the memory of billions of machines connected to
the network without their owners having to worry about it. Each new file
receives a unique and definitive coded name that will be used to track
and find it indefinitely, wherever it is hosted. Thus, to publish a
document, there is no longer any need for a website or blog: it is
simply thrown into the planetary database constituted by the community
of interconnected machines. Another advantage is that anyone can create
a database, a forum, a dialogue channel, an online store or a Net-TV by
relying on the infrastructure of the Network, without needing a
technical service provider or specific software. Similarly, a company
wishing to carry out very heavy IT work is no longer obliged to rent a
supercomputer: the new architecture allows it to mobilize for its own
benefit, for a few minutes, the unused computing power of millions of
computers. The rule of sharing has also been imposed for connections:
each device connected to the network serves as a relay for the systems
located in the surrounding area. When Audrey calls Vincent, the data
stream from her PDA is no longer sent to a fixed antenna that is
responsible for \"re-routing\" it to a central office. It is transported
in the background by the computers of a few dozen city residents who are
on the right trajectory at that moment. Each connection gives rise to
the appearance of a temporary and evolving ad hoc network, provided by
the user community. After work, Vincent wants to get some fresh air.
While he is strolling down the street, his PDA informs him that a union
demonstration is passing through the neighborhood. He asks to know more:
immediately, hundreds of demonstrators bombard him with messages to
encourage him to come and join them. But, a moment later, he receives an
official notice from the police reminding him that the order to disperse
has just been issued\... As he walks away, his PDA warns him that one of
his friends is passing through a neighboring street. The two friends
meet up and decide to go to an immersive gaming center - a system
developed in Japan around 2005, which has conquered the whole world.
Each rents a \"cave\", a cubic room whose six interior faces are 3D
screens. Totally immersed in the realistic setting of the game, Vincent
embarks on a complicated adventure with his friend, locked in a
neighboring cellar. They face a team installed in another gaming center
located in a distant city whose name is unknown to them. Suddenly,
Audrey\'s voice is heard in the cellar. She has been watching Vincent\'s
exploits on his PDA for a few minutes, but she would like him to go
home, it is time for him to go spend some time in the real world.
Tonight, Vincent and Audrey will fall asleep in the middle of nature:
Audrey has set her PDA to broadcast a country setting on the walls of
their room.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1639

1\. Generating 112 million euros without leaving your armchair in six
months is possible by\... a. Creating an online casino. b. Selling socks
on the Internet. c. Leaving subscribers to wait with the customer
service hotline. 2. What does happy slapping mean? a. Literally \"a
lucky shot\", the expression applies to a person with whom the sexual
encounter was of high quality. b. An expression that refers to children
who play at slapping each other. c. A game (English) that consists of
beating up someone at random, filming the attack and posting the scene
on the Net. 3. Mr. Chouard is best known for\... a. The quality of his
teaching of law and computer science. b. The success of his personal
contribution to the referendum on the European Constitution posted
online on a blog. c. Having announced the victory of the \"no\" vote
before everyone else. d. A strange idea consisting of drawing lots among
the citizens to find the country\'s leaders. 4. Adele is\... a. The
pseudonym of the most sought-after stripper on the Web. b. A new brand
of computer. c. The name of the government program for electronic
administration. 5. Voyages-sncf.com assured this in an advertisement
broadcast in May on the Net: \"Paris-New York in eight hours, under the
sea and by train, will it soon be possible?\" It was: a. A viral
marketing campaign. b. A disinformation operation. c. A project for the
future. 6. The bête noire of SNCF ticket office clerks is called: a.
Louis Gallois. b. Minimum service. c. iDTGV. 7. The site Laskard.com
offers: a. To explore \"your pleasures at the zen rate of 0.15 euros per
minute\". b. A \"nokpote\" category for those who want to break the
taboo of unprotected sex. c. Job reassignment ads for thugs. 8. In chat
language, TKC means? a. You\'re nuts. b. You smoked a joint. c. You\'re
screwed. 9. The initials RSS designate? a. A network under surveillance.
b. The group of hackers, the Rats on stage. c. News feeds. 10. Firefox
is the name of? a. A browser. b. A fighter pilot. c. An antivirus. 11.
Ten years ago, Jacques Chirac\... a. Still didn\'t know how to use a
field mouse. b. Was finally able to read Libération on the Web. c.
Wasn\'t very Internet-savvy either. Solutions 1c. Hotlines. 2c.
Gratuitous attacks broadcast on the Internet. 3b. His blog of the no was
incredibly successful. d. But he\'s not the only one to have launched
this idea. 4c. This program has 140 measures. 5a. A campaign that aims
to make noise around a brand even if it means making up stories. 6c.
From the name of the low-cost TGV ticket sold only online (non-exclusive
answer). 7b. This dangerous game is indeed \"nokapote\". 8b. From the
French \"Tu es cassé\". 9c. Acronym for Really Simple Syndication, RSS
is a format used for broadcasting news. 10a. This browser is free
software. 11a, b, c.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1640

ARC-ET-SENANS (Doubs), from our special correspondent - The first
architectural project by Claude-Nicolas Ledoux presented in 1774 for the
future Royal Saltworks was square. \"Why so many columns?\" asked Louis
XV. \"They are only suitable for temples and the palaces of kings.\"
Rejected by the king and his administration, Ledoux made circles, but
kept the Doric columns. Claude-Nicolas Ledoux wanted, as a good utopian
architect, to build an ideal city. At the Royal Saltworks, which
processed the salt produced in the neighboring town of Salins-les-Bains,
he housed the workers, craftsmen and their families within the building.
Frankly a Rousseauist, Ledoux hoped that his buildings arranged around
the ovens and the director\'s house would become \"those favorite
places\" where people lived their lives \"according to natural laws.\"
AN ACOUSMONIUM In a world freed from the salt tax, utopia has invested
the field of cyberspace, nomadism, hackers, free software and the
free-Net. Also, on the sidelines of the major summer festivals, the
Besançon association Elektrophonie presented Nuit bleue on July 9 and
10, an alternative program, under the vaults of an old building where
salt water was treated. An audience of fans came with blankets and
sleeping bags to listen to contemporary music broadcast by an
acousmonium for a night - sound consoles, orchestras of 80 loudspeakers,
the equivalent of 40 hi-fi systems. The device allows the spatial
arrangement of sounds, portable players, flying in balance games managed
by psycho-acoustic principles. Acousmatics aims to develop the sense of
listening by referring to Pythagoras, who taught philosophy to his
students behind a curtain and in the dark, to make them more receptive
to his discourse. In Arc-et-Senans, it was therefore necessary, to
listen to them, to turn one\'s back on the two very young musicians, the
Ukrainian Katia Zavoloka and the Berliner AGF (Antye Greie-Fuchs). Nuit
bleue - for the blue lights projected on the Ledoux colonnades - is in
its fourth edition, in partnership with the University of Birmingham,
where the Beast (Birmingham ElectroAcoustic Sound Theatre) and the
creative space Musiques et recherches de Bruxelles are located. Outside,
in the gardens, the visual artist Thierry Boucton has set up tents like
those found at rock festivals or rave parties, light, colorful,
illuminated from the inside, \"itinerant makeshift lanterns, with light
moorings.\" In a second space, the Saline d\'Arc-et-Senans, a center for
European cultural meetings, exhibits a sample of the photos offered at
the African Photography Meetings in Bamako. There we will see the photos
of the Malian Mohammed Camara, of Bamako, a fine and tranquil vision of
an Africa returned to itself, while the Haitian Roberto Stephenson
shakes up Port-au-Prince, his chaotic city, a little more, in color, in
panoramic, with insane superimpositions. Is the world running? Answer in
the vegetable garden of Bangladesh, behind the cooperage.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1641

Q: What does your \"Impeach God\" button mean? A: It\'s inspired by
Richard Nixon, who would have been impeached if he had remained in
office. He played a nice trick on Americans, not unlike that of the
Christian God: \"I have a secret plan to end the suffering in Vietnam,
but for heavenly security reasons I cannot allow mortals to understand
how my plan works. You just have to trust me and obey me without
question, because I see the big picture and you know I will be good to
you. If you don\'t obey me, you are bad; I will put you on my enemies
list and my infernal revenue service will come after you every year for
eternity.\" This rhetoric is used to convince some people to ignore
valid arguments that discredit you; it appeals to arguments that can
neither be validated nor invalidated. As for Bush, he is even worse. He
is lying and deserves to be impeached for his crimes against peace and
his war crimes. This terminology is borrowed from the Nuremberg trials,
whose criteria would certainly be sufficient to indict, convict and
execute Bush. But since I am opposed to the death penalty, I will settle
for life imprisonment! Q: Is there a connection between free software
and the political causes you support? A: I publish political
commentaries and comics that defend the human rights of citizens, and
free software respects the human rights of the user. We have identified
four essential freedoms for the computer user: the freedom to use a
program, the freedom to study and modify its code, the freedom to help
your neighbor by distributing copies of the program, and the freedom to
help the community by publishing modified versions of it. Free software
respects the freedoms of the user; \"Proprietary\" software, that is,
software that is not free, can work well but remains fundamentally
unfair on an ethical level. I have refused proprietary software in my
life. Q: Twenty years ago, would you have guessed that computers would
be installed in the living room and that Microsoft would be the absolute
master? A: No, and it is a mistake to say that it happened thanks to
Microsoft. It happened thanks to cheap computers, whose operating system
happened to be Microsoft\'s. It was a rather weak system, and I did not
pay attention to it. These computers were almost unusable. For example,
I designed my operating system, GNU, on a 32-bit architecture while
Microsoft did so much later. Microsoft was really not a giant and had
nothing to do with my decision. Today, the free software movement is
constantly under attack from Microsoft. Its leaders seek to impose
standards that prevent free software from being compatible with their
own. For example, they recently patented the new Word document format in
order to prevent free software from reading these documents. Q: Why
should my mother choose free software? A: Even those who cannot program
can enjoy the first two freedoms of our movement: the freedom to use
software freely and the freedom to distribute copies freely to friends.
Your mother has friends, doesn\'t she? I suppose she is used to
cooperating with her friends\... That should be legal. To prohibit
cooperation and social solidarity is unjust and tyrannical. It is true
that she will not be able to use our other two freedoms, the freedom to
modify software code and to publish modified versions. But it is like
freedom of the press: most people do not write articles in newspapers,
but they still receive the benefits of freedom of the press. When the
press is controlled in a country, we only have access to information
that serves the most powerful. It\'s the same with software.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1642

For Richard Stallman, software is no more valuable than a recipe or a
subway map. People should be able to freely obtain, modify, and
reproduce these tools. This is the philosophy he put forward in 1984
when he founded the \"free software\" movement, without which computers
and the Internet would not be what they are today. At the time, the
family computer did not exist, people did not meet on the Internet,
people wrote each other letters on paper, and people bought their
pornography at the convenience store. But what software publishers had
already understood was that they could get rich by affixing a copyright
system to their products similar to that of books. Revolted, the young
Richard Stallman decided to break down what he saw as a barrier to the
dissemination of knowledge by creating a license that would let the user
modify and copy the software as they wished. Today, his operating
system, GNU, is an essential component of the Linux system, which powers
20 million computers worldwide. The license he created has multiplied
the potential of many innovations, from Netscape to Google to Quake.
With his stature in the software field, Mr. Stallman came to UQAM
earlier this month to share his vision of copyright, not only in
computing, but also in other types of works, whether books, films or
music. His insight is welcome, since Ottawa is preparing a bill (C-60)
that should soon shake up all these areas by adapting copyright to the
digital age. New Light \"Copyright was originally created in many
countries to provide industry regulation for book publishers. They were
the ones restricted by copyright, not the public,\" he says, referring
to the harshness advocated by some regarding the sharing of music or
films on the Internet. \"At that time, the public did not have the means
to copy works on a large scale. Today, millions of people can do so. The
economic situation that made copyright advantageous has changed. It has
become a barrier to the needs of the public and it turns many users into
criminals. It is true that copyright must be adapted to our times, but
we are not necessarily going in the right direction.\" \"Today in the
United States, the government is very influenced by companies. Laws are
sold. So copyright has been modified in the interest of publishers, by
strengthening its scope and duration over time.\" The solution to this
situation is to relax copyright instead of strengthening it, according
to Mr. Stallman. In front of a packed amphitheater of admirers (also
there for the launch of the Semaine québécoise de l\'informatique libre,
which will take place from November 12 to 20), the father of free
software presented his \"proposals\" to modify copyright. No more than
10 years First, Richard Stallman proposed reducing the duration of
copyright to 10 years. \"In publishing, for example, most books are
discontinued after a year and unobtainable after three. Except for the
rich and famous, everyone has an interest in letting the public
reproduce their work every few years, so that it can continue to
exist.\" \"Publishers point to the example of best-selling authors to
defend copyright in its current form. But they are a small exception,
and they have the power to negotiate their contracts anyway.\" Ten years
is a far cry from what entertainment giants like Disney, which is
fighting to maintain exclusivity over characters created in the 1930s,
want. \"Copyright is not about an idea, it is about the application of
an idea,\" Stallman says. It was the World Intellectual Property
Organization (WIPO) that started this confusion by mixing works and
patents under the common concept of intellectual property. Copyright is
not property; WIPO\'s first flaw is its name. \"There is no point asking
Mr. Stallman what he thinks of Bill C-60, which is supposed to ratify
the WIPO agreements signed in 1996\... Three types of works According to
Richard Stallman, ideally, three types of works should be distinguished,
each with its own specific copyright. First, there are works of
\"practical use\" such as software, but also reference works, maps or
books intended for teaching. According to Stallman, all of them should
be able to be modified and distributed freely, as are cooking recipes.\"
The Wikipedia.org encyclopedia was built on this principle: it is the
readers themselves who write, modify and revise it, and it has become
the largest encyclopedia in the world. \"A second category would be
works that \"reflect someone\'s thoughts\": opinion essays, scientific
articles, memoirs, etc. Since modifying such works \"is not useful to
society,\" Stallman suggests allowing only \"the right to noncommercial
distribution of exact copies.\" Finally, the case of works of \"art and
entertainment\" poses a challenge, according to Stallman, since their
modification can \"destroy their artistic integrity.\" On the other
hand, one must respect \"the folkloric process of modification\" that,
he recalls, allowed Shakespeare to write memorable plays in a way that
would be illegal today. A \"compromise copyright\" would then allow
artists to authorize the noncommercial distribution of exact copies of
their works for 10 years, and then modified versions thereafter. So
should music sharing be allowed? \"There is no reason to prohibit it;
not only because the public wants to have access to it - which would be
a sufficient reason in itself - but also because sharing culture is a
good thing for society.\" \"As for musicians, they don\'t get a penny
from their records anyway. With the exception of rare celebrities, they
only make money from concerts. If the music circulates freely, it
promotes their concerts.\" As you will have understood, Richard Stallman
never intends to prohibit copies of a work, whether it is a cooking
recipe, a doctoral thesis or a rock album. A radical position,
certainly, but one that he has applied with great success in the world
of software. In this, his words will not leave anyone indifferent.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1643

STRASBOURG from our European office - In an unprecedented move, the
European Parliament voted as a bloc on Wednesday 6 July in Strasbourg to
definitively reject a bill aimed at patenting software in Europe. This
is \"the first time\" that the Assembly has blocked a directive at this
early stage of the procedure, stressed its president, the socialist
Josep Borrell, during a press conference. The Parliament had already
rejected three projects relating to biotechnologies, takeover bids and
dockers, but it had previously sought a compromise with the Council, the
co-legislator. For Michel Rocard, its socialist rapporteur, the
Parliament thus expressed \"collective anger\" against the
\"inadmissible\" way in which it was treated by the Commission and the
Council, who refused to take into account its first reading amendments.
Denouncing their \"total, arrogant and sarcastic contempt\", the former
Prime Minister of François Mitterrand recalled that \"the lack of
democracy\" that these institutions have demonstrated is \"one of the
components of the crisis\" that Europe is experiencing, since the French
and Dutch \"no\" votes in the referendum on the European Constitution.
Mr. Borrell stressed that this vote is \"the most unanimous ever
recorded\", with 648 votes for rejection, against 14, and 18
abstentions. It is also \"the most contradictory\", as Mr. Rocard noted.
Despite the unanimity of the vote, the text has deeply divided
Parliament, and each camp \"preferred to reject it outright, rather than
run the risk of letting the other\'s position be adopted\". ETHICS AND
FINANCE The directive has given rise to a lobbying campaign
\"unprecedented\", with \"thousands of emails\" from both sides. It must
be said that its ethical and financial stakes were considerable: for Mr.
Rocard, \"it was a question of preserving the free circulation of
ideas\" against patenting attempts that could bring their depositors \"a
few tens of billions of dollars per year\". In the other camp, the large
European companies (notably Nokia, Siemens, Philips and Alcatel), who
want to make their investments in research and development more
profitable, had convinced the Commission to act. To this end, the latter
had proposed giving Community legitimacy to the case law developed by
the European Patent Office. This intergovernmental body, based in
Munich, has issued more than 30,000 patents concerning
computer-implemented inventions, when their program makes \"a
contribution to the state of the art\", a definition subject to
controversy. However, it did so without any legal basis. The Munich
Convention of 1973, which it is supposed to apply, excludes from its
scope computer programs \"as such\". She likens them to creations of the
mind, protected by copyright. Mr. Rocard, as well as the supporters of
free software, wanted to stick to this convention: \"We do not patent
the notes of a musical chord, nor the rhymes of a poem, nor mathematical
formulas,\" recalled Mr. Rocard, emphasizing that \"software is only the
connection of mathematical formulas.\" In the first reading, he had
obtained that the European Parliament say that software is only
patentable if its development \"implements the forces of nature\" - and
not just a brain and paper. The Council of Ministers had refused to take
this position into account, despite the pressure exerted by the new
countries of the European Union. In Parliament, the representatives of
these States, which do not yet have large companies capable of
supporting the financial logic of patents, have taken up the cause of
free software, thus providing an unexpected reinforcement to the left.
After the text was rejected, Mr Rocard considered that the file was
\"not ripe\" for consensual legislation. The Commission clearly is not
either, since it indicated that it would not make a new proposal.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1644

Strasbourg - The European Parliament yesterday definitively rejected the
directive on the possibility of patenting software, ending three years
of a fierce battle that had torn the IT world apart between pro- and
anti-patents. MEPs voted against the text supported by the Member States
and the European Commission by an overwhelming majority of 648 votes to
14, burying for the first time a text at the second reading, even before
the search for a \"conciliation\" with the governments. The Parliament
being divided into two equal blocs on the text, the political groups
preferred to vote for a global rejection, rather than take the risk of
seeing amendments adopted that went against their opinion. Two camps The
text opposed on one side the giants of information technology (from
Microsoft to Nokia) and certain small and medium-sized enterprises
(SMEs), who wanted to see their research efforts protected, and on the
other side SMEs in favor of free software, who feared seeing their
development hampered by costly patents. The text did not propose
patenting software itself, i.e. computer programs, which is excluded by
the Munich Convention of 1973, which treats software as intellectual
creations, like a novel, and protects it by copyright. But the European
Patent Office has in recent years agreed to patent software incorporated
in industrial products, from mobile phones to washing machines, which
was not recognised in all Member States, due to the lack of a European
patent that applied to all. To validate these practices and harmonise
everything, the European Commission proposed at the beginning of 2002
that \"computer-implemented inventions\" could be protected by patents.
Last March, the ministers of the 25 had reached an agreement with
difficulty on this approach, according to which an ABS braking system
could be the subject of a patent, as could the software at the origin of
this invention. They had completely ignored the restrictive amendments
adopted by Parliament at first reading. The Council and the Commission
had \"total, arrogant and sarcastic contempt for Parliament\", declared
the rapporteur of the text, the French socialist Michel Rocard, accusing
Brussels of having been \"an accomplice of Microsoft\". \"The lack of
democracy is a cause of the current crisis in Europe. Let this rejection
serve as a lesson to the Council!\", he declared. \"We have defended the
free circulation of ideas and competition against monopoly. Software is
only a connection of mathematical formulas and you do not patent a
mathematical formula, nor the rhymes of a poem\", he further maintained.
Speaking of an issue \"of tens of billions of dollars per year\", Mr
Rocard considered that the file was \"not ripe\" for consensual
legislation. Pro-patent lobbyists made the best of a bad situation,
preferring the status quo, which leaves decisions in the hands of patent
offices and courts, to adopting Mr Rocard\'s amendments. \"This is a
wise decision that has avoided overly restrictive legislation,\" said
Mark MacGann, spokesman for EICTA, the pro-patent lobby for large
corporations. \"Parliament has avoided amendments that are disastrous
for innovation in Europe, but it is regrettable that the directive was
rejected,\" said Jonathan Zuck of ACT, an association of small and
medium-sized enterprises. In contrast, the FFII, which represents 3,000
small and medium-sized enterprises that support free software,
congratulated Parliament for \"voting \'no\' to bad legislation.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1645

The European software patent project is stillborn. By 648 votes out of
680 voters, the European deputies buried yesterday, at second reading,
the draft directive on the \"patentability of computer-implemented
inventions\". Brussels wanted to harmonize the law between the
twenty-five member states of the Union. And its experts wanted to
provide European companies with a law comparable to that in force in the
United States and Japan. \"The European Commission had declared, through
its spokesperson, Joaquin Amunia, that if the Parliament rejected the
joint proposal, it would not present new proposals. This vote therefore
puts an end to a process initiated in 1999\", underlines Pierre Breese,
president of an intellectual property consultancy firm. The European
Commission is paying for its obstinacy. Its leaders decided to impose
their thesis in defiance of the demands of the parliamentarians.
Brussels refused to take into account the 256 amendments tabled by MEPs
in September 2003, when the text was examined at first reading. Last
month, the European Committee on Legal Affairs also rejected the
amendments defended by Michel Rocard. The former French Prime Minister
argued that \"the free circulation of ideas was at stake\". Like many
European SME managers, he wanted to exclude software only from the scope
of the patent. Mathematical formulas cannot be defended by patents.
Opponents of the directive feared that introducing a patent for software
would paralyse their activities. \"It is a question of survival. \"A SME
cannot afford to spend 10% to 30% of its development budget to ensure
that it does not use patents filed by others, nor the hundreds of
thousands of euros of cash needed to assert its rights during a patent
infringement trial,\" explains Stéfane Fermigier, president of Nuxeo, a
French software publisher competing with Microsoft, Oracle and SAP.
Opponents have even developed a website where software used and
protected by patents is listed. One site (webshop.ffii.org) lists the
twenty or so patents taken by Sun Microsystems and Swisscom, making
e-commerce and websites complex to develop. The supporters are the
largest software publishers. The German SAP, which has a portfolio of
several hundred patents, wanted to benefit from legislation comparable
to that in force in the United States. A lobby group called Eicta, which
brings together major European technology companies including Alcatel,
Ericsson, Nokia, Philips and Siemens, was also very much in favour of
software patents. Their chairmen recently wrote to Tony Blair asking him
to defend \"jobs, innovation and investment in research and development
for the technologies of the future\". These leaders were heard by
Brussels, but they did not convince the MEPs. \"Rejecting the directive
had become the last option to send a strong and clear signal against
software patents\", underlines Georg Greve, chair of the
FreeSoftwareFoundation in Europe, a supporter of so-called free software
such as Linux. The latter is calling for an immediate end to the
granting of software patents by the European Patent Office. In 2001,
Europe protected 16,000 software inventions. The French government,
which had called for a balanced text, is disappointed. \"The patent is
not harmful,\" assures François Loos, Minister Delegate for Industry.
Marc Cherki

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1646

Strasbourg (EU), special envoy. All that for that! After two and a half
years of battle, the European Parliament has finally given up on
providing the Union with specific legislation on software protection. By
an overwhelming majority of 648 votes to 14, MEPs finally buried
yesterday the draft directive \"on the patentability of
computer-implemented inventions\" (Libération yesterday). Contrary to
appearances, the reasons for this almost unanimous rejection are far
from unequivocal: for the left of the Assembly, this project did not
sufficiently guarantee the non-patentability of software, which must be
able to circulate freely, just like ideas. While the conservatives and
liberals feared that the Commission\'s project would be \"distorted\" by
left-wing amendments which would have, on the contrary, prevented the
legal protection of these programs which run computers and many
machines, from GSM to washing machines and electronics embedded in
cars\... In the absence of a clear majority in one direction or the
other, the political groups therefore preferred to reject the entire
text. Yesterday\'s vote is therefore an admission of the powerlessness
of Parliament, incapable of reaching a broad consensus within it.
Certainly, the MEP and former socialist Prime Minister, Michel Rocard,
responsible for the report on this draft directive, presented it as a
victory for the supporters of \"software\", generally small and
medium-sized enterprises as well as individuals, and as a defeat for the
pro-patents, in this case the big industrialists such as Microsoft,
Siemens, Nokia or Alcatel. However, this is not the case, quite the
contrary: the European Patent Office has already granted licences
protecting software necessary for the proper functioning of machines,
even though the 1973 European Patent Convention expressly excluded the
patentability of computer programs (which are subject to the less
protective copyright regime). In doing so, the office is increasingly
modelling its case law on that of the United States and Japan.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1647

On June 26, the Paris City Hall hosted the \"Paris Capitale du Libre\"
event. Thus, the libertarian myth of open-source software, improperly
called \"free\", now aims to win the hearts of the general public beyond
expert circles. Riding the fashionable theme of community freeware, it
sends a message to everyone: IT should not be inserted into the economy,
it is just another freedom and nothing else. This discourse is a bad
blow to access to IT for the greatest number, a dangerous
misinterpretation for the European and French software industry, a real
incentive to relocate IT services outside Europe. The opening of
computer codes can be useful for research, and community work can
sometimes contribute to certain technological progress; but can we
sustainably ignore economic issues and in particular put ourselves on
the sidelines of intellectual property law? Is there really a future for
a \"libertarian altercomputing\" where creative work would be free? Is
freedom reduced to free? The principle of intellectual property is one
of the foundations of our democracies and our economies, which must be
guaranteed and protected. The Charter of Fundamental Rights of the
European Union and the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the
Citizen solemnly recall this. Calling this principle into question is
suicidal in a context of increased global competition. However, the
words of R. Stallman, the self-proclaimed pope of free software, are
edifying in this respect: \"Proprietary software is immoral and must not
exist\...\" To the question: \"How can companies developing free
software make a living from their programs?\" He even made the following
historic statement: \"This question does not interest me, I am against
the market society\...\" If Europe and France want to have a software
industry, which generates the income and jobs of tomorrow, it is
necessary, on the contrary, to strengthen its foundations and allow the
development of production capacities for these new \"works of the
mind\". A programmer who invents solutions has the right to be
remunerated accordingly by the marketing of his invention. He is not
obliged to share them. It is therefore urgent to protect the works of
the mind that are software, in France and in Europe. The commercial
reality of the \"open source software\" industry is simple: instead of
predictable software equipment expenditure, allowing the controlled
depreciation of major investments, it shifts the expenditure to the
services necessary for the \"tinkering\" of \"open source\" software.
Experience shows that these expenses give rise to multiple extensions,
since the fruit of this work is not \"stabilized\", and does not fit
into a normal economic relationship that guarantees its legal and
operational security. This is how the French Ministry of Finance has
just proudly signed the largest contract in the world for IT maintenance
on open source software, for an amount of 39 million euros. Which makes
this \"free software\" the most expensive software in history! Let\'s
pass it on to Parliament and the Court of Auditors who will assess, over
time, the relevance of the experience. \"Free\" software is therefore
not really free. Driven by IT service multinationals, large consumers of
maintenance and development credits, \"open source\" is now targeting
public administrations, very convenient cash cows in a sector where
competition is fierce. It would be naive for administrations to think
that they are gaining independence from software publishers when they
are much more dependent on service companies. From one dependency to the
other, everyone will choose. But preferring the solution that hinders
the development of a genuine European software industry is very unwise.
Prioritising service over creation is like choosing to build petrol
stations and ignoring the automobile industry. Preferring services also
means encouraging offshoring. Software creation activity is based on
research and can therefore be more \"fixed\" to a territory. IT services
activity can be carried out anywhere, especially where labour is less
expensive. IBM, for example, announced in July 2005 that it was hiring
14,000 people in India at the same time as its European social plans.
But it has no similar project on the software publishing side because
\"moving software design factories is very difficult\". Furthermore,
computer security has become a considerable issue in our societies. We
need well-defined, known, guaranteed products that engage the
responsibility of stable economic players. We owe citizens the security
of exchanges on the Internet. This requires increasingly sophisticated
processes, which are very expensive, and can only be financed by real
publishers who then know how to market them for the benefit of the
greatest number. The real challenge to be met is that of the widest
possible diffusion of IT in our economy to increase its competitiveness
and performance. In particular, in small and medium-sized businesses.
Under these conditions, promoting software that is free only in name is
a bad economic action. No intellectual work is free and all work
deserves a salary. Let us not let ourselves be carried away by the
ultra-libertarian fashion in areas as strategic as the software
industry. This would mean sacrificing the knowledge economy for the sake
of a supposed freedom that risks the death of our industries of the
future. Behind the illusions, the reality would be much less beautiful.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1648

The economic literature abounds on the advent of the information society
and on the increasing share of information technologies in global
growth. Europe has chosen to base its economic development on the
development of a knowledge society, affirmed in the \"Lisbon strategy\",
largely dependent on these technologies. Noting the European lag in
research (1), the European Commission launched the i2010 initiative (2)
on 1 June, which aims in particular to catch up on our investment delay,
to encourage innovation, to reduce the digital divide and to promote the
deployment of digital libraries making European knowledge, cultures and
languages accessible to all. Thus, over the last twenty years, millions
of jobs throughout the world have been created around the development of
software that has transformed the lives of businesses, individuals and
States by providing new products and services. Tens of thousands of
companies have been created, some of global size on the verge of
monopoly, others very local, concentrated on a niche of products or
services. The bulk of human activity in developed countries and the
development of the least developed countries in the future are thus
driven by the use by man of a tool which, for the first time, is not an
extension of his hand but of his mind. This event requires that we
approach the legal framework for the development of these technologies
with a new and appropriate perspective. The vote by the European
Parliament today on the patentability of software - in line with the
American model despite the dressing up - could call into question the
development of European innovative activities in this area, increase our
investment gap instead of bridging it, and jeopardize our independence
and security. These are not simple concerns - although prudence would
dictate that there be public and transparent debates on this point - but
economic facts. While a factual study had shown that the emergence of
software patents in the United States had led to a reduction of 10 to
15% on average in research expenses in favor of legal fees, hearings
conducted by the Federal Trade Commission have highlighted that this
transfer could reach 35% for certain innovative SMEs in Silicon Valley.
The patent system is in fact totally unsuitable for software,
effectively protected by the copyright regime which prevents piracy,
while leaving the possibility for other innovators to create competing
software made more efficient each time by the contribution of new ideas.
It is against free and undistorted competition that some dominant
players in the world of software and communication are pushing the idea
of patenting software, diverting its use in passing in order to be able
to claim exclusivity in the long term of immaterial information
processing processes, and thus exclude any competing software from the
same market. As Microsoft co-founder Bill Gates himself said in a famous
memorandum in 1991: \"If people had understood how patents were issued
when most of today\'s ideas were invented, and had taken out patents,
the industry would have ground to a halt today. I am sure that some big
company will patent something obvious related to interface, object
orientation, algorithms, application extensions or some other crucial
technique. If that company does not need our patents, then it will have
the right for 17 years to take as much of our profits as it wants. The
solution is to patent as much as we can.\" Since no software has a
useful life of twenty years as it stands, who would have any use for
Multiplan today? Patent applications - as Bill Gates mischievously
pointed out - can only concern basic ideas or concepts. Thus, and to
take only the example of daily use of the Internet, patents have been
granted for the \"shopping cart\", the online loan application, ordering
by mobile phone, Internet telephony, instant messaging or even\... for
the double click! If the software becomes patentable in Europe, the
holder of one of these trivial patents will have the right of life or
death over thousands of companies! Another serious perverse effect of
the patentability of software is the endangerment of the development of
\"free software\" used by a growing number of administrations, companies
and individuals. This software, distributed through innovative and
adapted licenses, for example the GPL license invented by Richard
Stallman, is nevertheless a model of collective intelligence placed at
the service of the common good. The quality, reliability and
availability of this software are ensured by the permanent and
collective development of developers from all over the world. The
successive cases of security flaws, such as those of the \"Blackberry\"
messaging service, intentional or not, discovered in proprietary
software also highlight the interest of free software for access to its
source code. The fact that 60% of free software developers are European
is probably also not unrelated to the offensive led in favor of software
patents\... We must also question the way in which the case was handled
at the European level. The patentability of software is not only a
proposal due to a poor assessment by lawyers who are unfamiliar with
technological practices and unaware of the challenges of the information
society. Why these repeated breaches of the democratic process caused by
this directive? The sum of particular interests is not equal to the
general interest! However, it is striking to note the collusion of
interests between the zealots of software patentability and the
potential beneficiaries! The supporters of patenting are also advancing
in disguise. Thus, everyone will have noted that Philippe Simonnot, who
campaigns in France as \"director of the economic observatory of law\"
for patentability, is above all an employee (3) of the \"Centre for a
New Europe\", a think-tank which, in addition to organizing a
\"capitalism ball\" last February, also advocates the privatization of
health systems and relayed, last March, an article defending a reform of
European law on monopolies, in favor of\... Microsoft! Let us listen to
Bill Gates who, on June 29 before the Japan Business Federation warned:
\"If you depend too much on people belonging to other companies or other
countries, you relocate your brains and your capacity for innovation.\"
Large countries like India whose growth is largely based on the
development of activities linked to information technologies have
refused the system of software patents. Europe cannot afford today to
take the risk of further reducing its growth, of losing jobs and
independence. The European Parliament must once again reaffirm that
software is inherently unpatentable and reject the joint proposal of the
Council and the Commission. \* Member of the European Parliament (PES).
\*\* Member of the Tarn (UMP). 1) The United States invests 400 euros
per capita in research, compared to 350 euros for Japan and 80 euros for
Europe. 2) http://europa.eu.int/i2010 3) http://www.cne.org/
about2.htm#4, philippe.simonnot@cne.org BY MICHEL ROCARD \* AND BERNARD
CARAYON \*\*

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1649

Dijon (Côte-d\'Or) special correspondent The recruitment of a former
president of the Parliament, thousands of emails and demonstrations in
Strasbourg and Brussels: three years of lobbying on the highly
controversial directive on software patents is three years of a struggle
for influence \"of quite exceptional magnitude\", according to Xavier
Dutrénit, parliamentary assistant to the socialist MP Gilles Savary. And
a real confrontation of styles: rather institutional and traditional for
the large companies pro-patents, and more chaotic and individual for the
opponents, a motley group of activists from associations, SMEs and
isolated programmers. Here, in Dijon, at the Rencontres mondiales du
logiciellibre, a sort of summer university for geeks, these computer
enthusiasts, the dozens of people present fear the exploitation of
software patents by large companies. Bob on his head typing on his
laptop, Alexis, a teacher in Rome, demonstrated in front of the Italian
presidency. Frédéric, with a ponytail, T-shirt and sandals, has made
\"several trips to Brussels for demonstrations of 300 or 500 people\".
Like the anti-patent lobby, they have both used the Internet
extensively: dozens of sites dissecting the text, mass emails to
European parliamentarians\... Behind the apparent mess, the coalition of
opponents has also managed to motivate more traditional relays. A former
Commission official, Philippe Aigrain, opens his address book to them.
The Greens, convinced from the start, play the role of intermediaries
with the other parties. The European Confederation of SMEs (which brings
together 500,000 firms) supports them, because it fears that large
companies will take advantage of patents to block competition. Among the
supporters of the anti-patents, we even find the Open Society Institute,
an organization founded by the former speculator George Soros, who
financed the Federation for a Free Computing Infrastructure (FFII). The
latter even paid for a full-time lobbyist in Brussels. \"It\'s the same
symptom as during the \"no\" campaign in France, believes Mark MacGann,
who heads Eicta, the lobby of the big pro-patent companies. Atomized
elements have managed to organize themselves across Europe thanks to
modern technologies.\" Result? During the first reading in Parliament in
September 2003, the MEPs amended the directive and blocked software
patents. For the pro-patent lobbies, it was \"a good hangover\" and the
failure of \"easy\" lobbying, continues MacGann. Change of tone: the big
names in industry, until then \"absent\", increased the pressure in
anticipation of the second reading in Parliament. Last month, all MEPs
and their assistants received an email entitled Free ice cream!,
inviting them to take to the streets to take advantage of the deal\...
and read the documents explaining why software patents are essential to
the economy. The former Speaker of the Parliament, the Irishman Pat Cox,
was hired as a consultant by Eicta and hit the stands. Yesterday at
noon, after the parliamentary debate, the MEPs lunching by the canal in
Strasbourg even got a final reminder: a boat with a banner reading
\"Vote for the Computer-Implemented Inventions Directive\" passed in
front of them.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1650

The European deputies meeting in Strasbourg are discussing today, in
second reading, the draft \"directive on the patentability of
computer-implemented inventions\". They will vote tomorrow. The issue:
to protect computer programs using \"patent law\". Brussels wants to
standardize the regulations between the twenty-five member states of the
European Union. In the first reading, the European deputies had
restricted the scope of application of patents to inventions implemented
by software. The ambiguities of the text, drawn up by experts from the
European Commission, were removed thanks to a series of amendments
tabled in September 2003. Recently, the European Committee on Legal
Affairs rejected, by sixteen votes to ten, the amendments defended by
Michel Rocard. According to the former French Prime Minister, \"it is
the free circulation of ideas that is at stake\". Many small European
companies, which defend solutions running on the Linux operating system,
and publishers such as the French Ilog are fiercely opposed to the
patent on software already in force in the United States and Japan. They
believe that the patent will strengthen the power of the most powerful
companies. \"Microsoft in the United States has proudly announced that
its objective is to file 3,000 patents this year,\" explains Georg
Greve, president of the FreeSoftwareFoundation Europe. \"Millions of
Internet sites, like that of Le Figaro, risk becoming illegal.\" The
analysis is contested by the largest European technology companies. They
have asked for his support from Jean-Claude Juncker, the president of
the European Commission whom Tony Blair succeeded on July 1. In a letter
dated June 30, the executives of Alcatel, Ericsson, Nokia, Philips and
Siemens state that \"the amendments proposed by the European Parliament
negatively affect the European digital technology industry, employment
and investment in research and development for the technologies of the
future.\" According to a study by an American university, SMEs own 20%
of all patents granted in the last five years in Europe, compared to 80%
for large groups and government organizations. Large companies are even
threatening to derail the directive if the amendments are finally
adopted. For the time being, software is protected only by copyright.
The protection lasts seventy years after the death of its author. With
the patent, software-based inventions, already protected in Europe, can
be defended for only twenty years. \"In 2001, out of more than 110,000
patent applications received by the European Patent Office, more than
16,000 concerned such inventions,\" underlines a recent report from the
European Parliament. MC

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1651

BRUSSELS from our European office - Before leaving for vacation, the
European Parliament will vote on Wednesday, July 6, on a text with
considerable ethical and financial stakes: the patentability of
computer-implemented inventions. It is highly divisive, since it poses
the following question: is the patent suitable for software, these
computer programs now incorporated in most industrial products, from the
airbag (air cushion) of cars to the mobile phone? The text on which the
Parliament is preparing to fight constitutes a new piece of the
decidedly controversial legacy left by Frits Bolkestein, the former
liberal commissioner in charge of the internal market, at the origin of
the draft directive on the liberalization of services. It was on his
proposal that the Prodi Commission had, in 2002, decided to legislate,
in order to put an end to the situation of \"legal uncertainty\" that
characterizes the European Union. This insecurity is linked to the
policy pursued by the European Patent Office. This intergovernmental
body, based in Munich, has already issued more than 30,000 patents
concerning computer-implemented inventions, when their program made \"a
contribution to the state of the art\". It has thus protected them for a
period of twenty years. However, it is supposed to apply a 1977
Convention - known as the Munich Convention - which excludes computer
programs \"as such\" from its scope. The contradiction between its
doctrine and its jurisprudence is due to the fact that it is paid from
royalties: \"As it is paid from the beast, it has patented everything
and anything\", laments the French socialist Gilles Savary. REDHIBITORY
COSTS The supporters of free software wanted the Commission to confirm
the content of the Munich Convention: works of the mind must not be
patented, under penalty of prohibiting innovation. \"If Gutenberg had
patented the printing press, there would be no books today\", they say.
They believe that a patent on software would make it impossible to write
new formulas, since this uses existing modules by combining them in
different ways. Now united within the Association for a Free Information
Infrastructure (FFII), they also argue that the costs of software
patents risk strangling SMEs. Pieter Hintjens, director of Imatix, a
small Belgian company of ten people, recounts that when he launched a
mobile phone information service, a competitor asked him to pay a
license, on the grounds that he had filed a patent on this invention in
the United States. \"If he had filed it in Europe, I would have had to
give up, since I could not afford to pay!\", he exclaims. On the side of
the supporters of patentability, the Business Software Alliance, which
brings together the large American software publishing companies,
including Microsoft, demanded the right to patent computer programs \"as
such\". European companies, represented by Unice (Union of Industrial
and Employers\' Confederations of Europe, which represents all sectors
that use software), but also Eicta, a professional association
representing information technology companies such as Nokia, Siemens,
Philips and Alcatel, wanted the Commission to make the case law of the
European Patent Office mandatory. Mark MacGann, Director General of
Eicta, believes that \"research and development based on data
processing\" should not be excluded from patents, as advocates of free
software are demanding. \"Our companies invest a lot of money in it and
want a return on investment,\" says Mr MacGann, citing Philips, \"which
improves the definition of television images\" and wants to protect its
inventions. For Gérald Sédrati-Dinet, French Vice-President of the FFII,
\"image processing is a simple matter of computer programming.\" It is
these European companies that the Commission has heard, \"given their
economic weight.\" But in 2003, the European Parliament narrowed the
scope of its proposal, under the influence of former French Prime
Minister Michel Rocard. He said that software is only patentable if its
development involves \"forces of nature\", that is, Rocard explains, if
it requires \"a back-and-forth between the mathematical formula that
constitutes the software, and experience\", as would be the case for the
development of the \"ABS anti-lock braking system\". The Council,
co-legislator, rejected this text. Poland, which joined the free
software camp, almost swung the majority, but was called to order for
procedural reasons. \"We do not have large companies capable of
supporting the logic of patents\", explains, in the European Parliament,
the Czech MEP of the right, Zuzana Roithova, who defends SMEs. Free
software advocates are counting on these new MEPs from the East to put
their point of view forward in the second reading, where an absolute
majority of registered voters will be required.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1652

On 20 June, the European Parliament\'s Legal Affairs Committee adopted,
against the advice of the rapporteur Michel Rocard, a series of
amendments that open the door wide to the patentability of software. For
almost ten years now, the European Patent Office (to legalise its
practice), the European Commission and a very small number of
multinationals have been trying to obtain this legal blessing for a
major auction of knowledge. Already in 2003, during the first reading in
the European Parliament, the Legal Affairs Committee adopted a report in
favour of patentability. Some of the members of this committee are
traditionally sensitive to pressure from lobbies and to the ways of
thinking of what has become a patent system (offices, consultants,
specialist lawyers). But in 2003, the Parliament was able to elevate the
debate in plenary session, to bring it up to the level of scientific,
innovation, social and economic issues. It then adopted a text that
clearly rejected the patentability of software and software-based
information processing methods. Will Parliament succeed in doing so
again? To help it make its decision, we must return to the basics,
abandon legal jargon for a moment and explain the issues at stake in
this choice in terms that are accessible to all. What is software? It is
the expression in information of information processing. We have come a
long way, the reader will say. A few examples are more telling: it is
what we use to write, create, communicate, calculate, model, memorize;
it is what structures all media, from text to animated images; it is the
basic instrument of all science; the invisible grammar of each person\'s
expression and the framework of exchanges between all; but also the
instrument of medical diagnosis and certain therapies. Whoever can
control software innovation, channel it or restrict it to their own
advantage, holds power with extreme consequences. The narrow vision of a
very small number of companies and a patent system working on its own
extension is opposed here to the solid and reasoned rejection of
scientists and innovators, of the vast majority of companies concerned,
of economists who do not stop at simple dogmas on the usefulness of
property and of intellectuals who have come to understand where software
patentability is leading us. Scientists and software practitioners are
almost unanimously opposed to the legalization of patentability. The
most prestigious European scientists have sent a petition to the
European Parliament which considers the patentability of software and
information processing \"ethically scandalous, economically unjustified
and harmful, harmful to science and innovation and dangerous for
democracy\". Tens of thousands of engineers and software developers,
including a large number of employees of the few multinationals
demanding monopolies (Nokia, Ericsson, Siemens, and the companies united
with them in the Eicta lobby) are similarly opposed. But if we are to
believe the proponents of patentability, only a few financiers and
lawyers understand the issues surrounding software. Study after study,
even the organizations that were initially most in favor of software
patents have had to recognize that European SMEs consider them harmful
to their business. European organizations that bring together SMEs, such
as CEA-PME, have clearly opposed the position of the European Medef, the
Union of Industrial and Employer Confederations of Europe (Unice). The
structures that have chosen cooperative innovation through free software
know that the future belongs to them if it is not confiscated through
patents. But all this still only concerns specialized players. What
about economies and societies? The economy is not the realm of
consensus. There are two main schools of thought on this subject. The
first invokes the incentive that patent monopolies provide for software
innovation, without explaining how all the innovation that has given us
today\'s techniques and industrial empires could have done without them.
Brilliant representatives of the second addressed an open letter to the
European Parliament with similar orientations to those of the
scientists\' petition. Has anyone finally tried to understand where all
this is leading us on a larger scale? Since the 1970s, a group of
multinationals, initially American, then led by IBM, Monsanto and
Pfizer, then joined by a few European industrialists and newcomers such
as Microsoft, AOL-Time Warner or Vivendi-Universal, has convinced States
to trigger the systematic extension of patents to new fields and the
tightening of the implementation of copyright. Their goal was simple: to
realize the dream of every investor by freeing themselves from human
labor and realizing value on the free reproduction of information. In
the field of software, Europe and India are still resisting this
madness. So we have not yet seen anything of what it will bring us if we
accept it. The decision of July 6 is a test of the ability of politics
to define the limits that a certain capitalism must not cross, and a
large part of the economic actors are waiting for confirmation that it
is still possible for the economy to develop in ways that are compatible
with society and humanity. May the European Parliament confirm the
confidence it won with its vote in 2003 by clearly rejecting once again
the patentability of software and software-based information processing.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1653

The European Parliament will vote tomorrow on the draft directive on the
patentability of computer-implemented inventions. After several months
of uncertain debate, there is still hope that the draft will be adopted
as is. Most of the amendments proposed by Michel Rocard, leader of the
opponents of the draft, were rejected by the legal committee. But there
are still enough which, if adopted, would undermine the logic of the
text. Ladies and gentlemen, one more effort! In truth, the positions
taken on this subject by the former French Prime Minister are very
strange. We cannot respond to him here point by point. We have done so
in other instances (1). Let us simply regret here that such a
prestigious politician has committed his credit to such a dubious
controversy. Opponents of the software directive state the following
syllogism: ideas are not patentable; but software is similar to ideas;
therefore software is not patentable. They will therefore try to draw a
line between software and computer-implemented inventions. We will not
bore the reader with the Byzantine quibbles that have been used on this
occasion. We will simply say that billions of euros are at stake and
that thousands of European patents would be sent to the shredder if we
followed Mr. Rocard, the nasty American trusts that we are, in
principle, trying to target remaining out of reach. Some of them,
moreover, support Rocardian positions for strategic reasons. In the
so-called \"software\" community, that is to say, unpatented, there are
not only naive engineers who have fallen in love with their programs and
are working for the progress of humanity to the point of forgetting to
earn a living. Contrary to what has been claimed by opponents of the
directive, SMEs and particularly \"start-ups\" are interested in
patenting their computer inventions. In their dialogue with banks, which
do not necessarily have the necessary knowledge to assess the technical
merits of the file presented to them, the patent allows business leaders
to give credit to their project. A micro-enterprise without any patent
risks being swallowed up by the big sharks. Far from distorting
competition by concentrating all the cards in the same hands, the patent
allows a less unequal game. To continue the metaphor of the nuclear
strategy, we will say that the patent potentially allows a dissuasion of
the weak against the strong. Just as there was equalization by the atom,
there could be an equalization by the patent. The \"economics of law\" -
a discipline unfortunately too little known in France - teaches that
property emerges each time the benefits of appropriation are greater
than the costs of appropriation. Which is enough to explain why an idea
cannot be patentable since it is only valid in exchange with others. The
same is not true of an invention implemented by computer, however
immaterial it may seem. Indeed, such an invention can be put on the
market without the secret of its operation (what in the jargon of
computer scientists is called the \"source code\" of the software) being
revealed. It is appropriable, and therefore patentable, it is as simple
as that. And no additional qualification is needed. That the patents
must then be of good quality is obvious. But it would be absurd to limit
the scope of computer patentability by prejudices from another age. \*
Director of the Economic Observatory of Law (University of
Versailles-Saint-Quentin). Latest book published: Economics of Law,
Volume 2: People and Things, Les Belles Lettres. (1) This complete
response as well as the white paper that the Economic Observatory of Law
has published on the patentability of software are available by writing
to contact@oed.uvsq.fr BY PHILIPPE SIMONNOT \*

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1654

Bill C-60, which Ottawa introduced on June 21, and which amends the
Copyright Act for the digital age, goes against the very foundations of
the Internet. This is what several groups that defend free computing
believe, gathered yesterday as part of the \"Copyright 2005, Copyright
and You\" day. For the father of free computing, American Richard
Stallman of the Free Software Foundation, whose conference was at the
heart of the event, the Canadian legislation is clearly a step further
towards censorship, by imitating the \"unjust laws\" of the United
States. \"Copyright laws were once intended to restrict the role of
publishers on behalf of authors, but they have been hijacked and now
restrict the general public for the benefit of publishers on behalf of
authors,\" he explained in an interview with Le Devoir, a few minutes
before delivering his speech entitled Copyright and the Community in the
Age of Computer Networks. \"Prohibiting the sharing of information is an
attack on the very foundation of society: the spirit of goodwill, social
solidarity.\" Petition against C-60 However, shouldn\'t the Canadian
bill allow artists to decide whether or not to provide online access to
their work? Nonsense, replies Russell McOrmond of the consulting firm
Flora, which launched a petition against the bill that 2,000 Canadians
have already signed. For groups like Creative Commons Canada,
Savoir-faire Linux and Communautique, who all had a booth yesterday, the
proposed reforms favor intermediaries between artists and the public to
the detriment of the latter. They are based on an economic model that
does not suit the world of the Web. After all, the inventors of the
World Wide Web wanted to go against the dominant system. \"They
developed laws that impose the same structures on the Internet as those
of the usual industry,\" laments Mr. McOrmond, who participated in the
round table following the conference. For him, this law means that, in
order to access culture, you will have to buy certain preferred brands.
\"The model is not adapted,\" adds Daniel Pascot, professor in the
department at Laval University and also participating in the debate.
\"It is made for rival goods, that is to say goods that are not shared,
and it is based on the idea of scarcity. However, software creators
create an artificial scarcity \[to enter the market game\].\" The spirit
behind these remarks lies in this old and universal idea according to
which we do not invent anything, we always create from something. And
this something created belongs to everyone, to the community, the basis
of all society. More informative than militant, this event organized by
FACIL (for the collective appropriation of free computing), in
collaboration with the LabCMO research group at UQAM and the social
enterprise Koumbit, aimed to broaden the debate surrounding Bill C-60.
According to Mr. Stallman, Canadian legislation no longer serves the
public interest. Ottawa should instead legalize the non-commercial
exchange of certified copies (of documents, music files, etc.).
\"Software is very much like a recipe,\" he compares. \"However, the
user of a recipe has freedoms: to prepare the recipe he wants, to study
it, to modify it, to transmit it to others.\" An image that could serve
as a lesson for future legislation\...

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1655

NANTES from our special correspondent - You have to arrive early at
Scopitone to make the most of what this Nantes festival (4 years old)
has to offer. Reducing it to a simple succession of concerts, as
exciting as they may be, would be an insult. Organized until July 2 by
the team of the Olympic, a discovery venue essential to the urban area,
Scopitone has been combining sound and images since 2002, considered
essential elements of today\'s entertainment, without ever reducing one
to an illustration of the other. The idea germinated, explains Eric
Boistard, director of the Olympic, with the emergence of electronic
music, hungry for visuals to compensate for the solitude of the DJ.
\"The era is one of maturity. The technique, dominant in the early
years, has given way to the artistic message. » We should be happy about
it and above all enjoy it, during the day, at the Nantes shipyards, with
the digital art exhibitions, at night, in all the spaces of the
Trocardière, in Rezé, in the large hall, the marquee or the abandoned
ice rink, converted into a screening room. In terms of digital art, the
exhibition at the shipyards offers a series of unusual experiences that
Gaspard, 5 years old, sums up with great enthusiasm to his delighted
father: \"In every compartment, there\'s something great!\" Gaspard is
not wrong. On the upper floor of the large building full of history,
Phase or Bloc6tm offer a fun way to consider music. In particular
through a video game (Bloc6tm), in which two users each manipulate their
team of eight robots representing eight sounds. They must be connected
to activate them, and brought closer together to speed up the tempo.
Phase, created in collaboration with Ircam, allows a player to move a
ball through a 3D landscape crossed by a furrow and dotted with sound
grass clumps, percussion trees, etc. A MAGIC TRICK And then there is
Goo, this orchestra of computers manipulated live by ten artists on site
and ten others on the other side of the world, all connected by Internet
to a communal sound bank. \"A permanent sound morphing,\" explains
Jean-Philippe Roux, one of the musicians present, \"in which everyone
shares responsibility for the form.\" Exactly like free software that
feeds on contributions from the community. The result is a moving hubbub
that frightens, tires, surprises, and seduces. It is also a question of
trial and error, of learning (the Olympic works in collaboration with
elementary schools on multimedia creation), of dialogue between artists
and spectators, especially during the day. At night, the mystery of the
show takes over. At 7pm, under the big top, the Austrian Klaus Obermaier
presented Apparition, his latest creation. Two dancers, a screen and
different projections on their bodies and on the screen. Lines that
intersect, merge and seem to cut the space into slices. A device of
great beauty, a magic trick. In the large hall, the stage, surrounded by
eight screens, gives the impression of being at the heart of the
concert, alongside the Parisian Sébastien Schuller, whose first show we
were eagerly awaiting. The work is there, the delicacy of the romantic
songs and instrumentals too, but the voice is still too timid.
Experience should help. Meanwhile, at the ice rink, a few visual haikus
paraded. Suspended moments, last touches of serenity before the party
and the rhythms of Miss Kittin, Mylo or Vitalic sweep everything away in
their whirlwind.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1656

Tarifa (Spain) special correspondent It is a charming town at the
southern tip of Spain, surrounded by hills bristling with wind turbines.
One of the best spots for kite-surfing: kilometers of sandy beaches,
turquoise sea, and fresh wind that attracts its battalions of surfers
from Northern Europe every year. \"You are in Tarifa, the southernmost
city in Europe,\" proclaim the tourist signs. Opposite, the Moroccan
coast. This is where the distance between Europe and Africa is the
shortest. Around thirty kilometers that thousands of illegal migrants
try to cross every year at the risk of their lives. On June 14, 14 of
them, including six children, drowned in this perilous crossing. A
border under high tension, invested for two years by Fadaiat. For ten
days, this temporary laboratory for \"freedom of movement\" and
\"freedom of knowledge\" was deployed within the walls of the medieval
castle. Analog and digital activists, artists, coders, architects,
videographers, trade unionists, members of social organizations from
Europe met during workshops, screenings, network performances around the
issues of mobility, migration and precariousness. Sharing. \"In common
Arabic, Fadaiat refers to satellite dishes or spaceships, but its more
academic meaning means \"across spaces\", a beautiful metaphor to talk
about meeting, connection between the two borders. The idea is to
transform this castle, symbol of \"fortress Europe\", into a space for
communication, dialogue, reflection\", explains Florian Schneider, one
of the founders of the No border network and initiator of the \"No one
is illegal\" campaign, in 1997 at Documenta X in Kassel. As part of
Fadaiat, the activist launched a hybrid academy, the final stage of the
European DASH project \"networking against exclusion\" (1). Borderline
Academy is trying to lay the foundations for new forms of knowledge
sharing and organization: \"After these years of networking, it may be
time to strengthen ties,\" he believes. Spontaneous. A seminar condensed
over two days last year, Fadaiat has mutated into a more spontaneous
event, with thematic workshops (tactical mapping, education, free
software, etc.) where everyone can plug in. In the church transformed
into a smoky conference room, the debriefing of Euromayday, a global day
of action against disposable work, is in full swing between \"old
school\" trade unionists and young people in precarious situations. At
the beginning of the week, it was the border regime in Europe that was
at the heart of the debates in front of a studious assembly typing their
notes on their laptops. The discussions are filmed and archived online.
Spanish videographers raise awareness among the local population about
what is happening in the castle by broadcasting three hours of programs
daily on the local television channel. Conversely, Dutch performers from
International Festival make offbeat TV reports on life in Tarifa through
the prism of the event. At nightfall, in the courtyard of the castle,
Fadaiat connects to the rest of the world, thanks to free streaming
tools (2). VJs decorate the walls, images from Tangier are mixed live
with a music stream from Barcelona. From the Netherlands and Sicily,
media tactician Jo van der Spek and free software programmer Jaromil
present the Streamtime project, a network developed with Iraqis to help
local media connect and make themselves heard across borders. That
evening, the stream from Iraq was unfortunately cancelled, the person in
charge had to go and pick up a cousin stuck at the border. Another
initiative was that of Artists without Walls, Israeli and Palestinian
artists who had opened a virtual window in the "separation wall,"
projecting on each side of the wall what was happening opposite,
allowing people to communicate across the barrier. Virtual bridge. In
this open-air, self-organized laboratory, it is sometimes difficult to
tell the difference between a lost surfer and a dreadlocked coder. "We
are thinking about an architecture where physical, social space and
digital networks interact to create a new territory," explains Osfa,
from the Hackitectura collective, one of the main organizers of the
event. Art, society and politics are very difficult to separate today,
the role of art is to construct situations that produce new
consciousnesses, new imaginaries." Osfa, who is one of the founders of
Indymedia Chiapas, also participates in Indymedia Estrecho. Unlike other
\"Indymedia\", alternative media networks, this one is not restricted to
one city but extends to the entire area of the Strait of Gibraltar. Last
year, a virtual bridge was thrown to the other side, with a Wi-Fi
connection between Tarifa and Tangier that allowed people to follow the
festivities. Unfortunately, this year, the organizers did not obtain the
necessary authorization or visas for the North African artists. So it
was a boat that took charge of making the connection. On the sailboat, a
crew of hacktivists (Ewen Chardronnet, Nathalie Magnan, Andy Bichlbaum
of the Yes Men, Nicola Triscott of Arts Catalyst, Marko Peljhan of
Makrolab) set themselves the goal of joining the two sides to physically
explore the migration routes between Morocco and Spain. From Gibraltar
(United Kingdom) to the enclave of Ceuta (Spain), from Tarifa to
Tangier, they crossed all the borders, submitted to the control process,
checking papers, searching the boat. They took the opportunity to
document their journey (GPS tracking, radio communication) and mark the
dangers. \"By being behind our screens, we end up having an immaterial
vision of the world, we forget the physical reality, explains Nathalie
Magnan. The idea of Sailing for Geeks is to manage to give a
representation of what a border really is.\" \"The crossing is very
dangerous, with wind, strong currents, heavy traffic, specifies Ewen
Chardronnet, it also allows us to have an idea of what it is like to
cross this zone in a patera, the makeshift boats of illegal migrants.\"
Counter-surveillance. The sailboat serves as a test boat for the
counter-surveillance technologies deployed on land by the rest of the
Makrolab team. In Tarifa, radio amateur Aljosa Abrahamsberg has set up
an antenna on the castle tower to intercept maritime communications
between cargo ships and Tarifa Trafic, to find out how dangerous the
cargoes are and where they are going. A radar can track traffic in the
strait. In Tangier, the sailors are with two representatives of Moroccan
associations, Hicham Limrami and Youssef Hbib, young electrical
technicians from Larache, members of the Women\'s Forum and Pateras por
la vida, an association that educates the poorest children, in order to
give them \"a boat to succeed here rather than seeking happiness beyond
the sea.\" Both took part in the three-day workshop hosted by Indymedia
Estrecho, where they learned how to manage a site in order to soon
launch the first Moroccan Indymedia. \"Indymedia allows us to have
support, to connect our local associations to the rest of the world.
Here, in Morocco, there is no freedom of speech.\" Back to Tarifa, where
the Fortresses of Europe project is presented, a transversal line that
should connect three European medialabs (the K@2 center in Karosta in
Latvia, Kuda.org in Novi Sad in Serbia and Tarifa where a permanent
observatory of the strait is planned). All have the particularity of
having diverted old fortifications into a space of exchange and free
circulation of knowledge. Streamed on the wall, live from Karosta,
sculptors are melting metal in a glowing brazier. At the same time on
the beach of Tarifa, they celebrate Saint John, gigantic bonfires are
burning along the beach. It is also at this time of year, around the
summer solstice, that migrants are most numerous to try their luck. (1)
In charge of providing an infrastructure to activists (http://dash.org).
(2) Stream archives: http://fadaiat.net/?q=en/streams

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1657

Even if the Scopitone, ancestor of the video clip, was only saved from
oblivion thanks to a few super-eight fetishists, its spirit can be found
today in the many attempts to marry image and sound. For the fourth
time, Nantes is hosting this weekend the festival of the same name
entirely dedicated to the intersections between music, dance, cinema,
video and digital art. With a two-part program: Scopitone Jour, at the
Ateliers et Chantiers de Nantes, where the public will be able to learn
about new technologies (editing, publishing on the Internet, free
software, etc.), participate in the debate on peer-to-peer, and discover
a dozen performance installations with the sonographic creations of
Servovalve, the 3D musical composition game of Bloc 6TM or the Grand
Ochestre d\'ordinateurs (GOO) of the Nantais of Apo33, a collective
musical production in network. At night, Scopitone takes over the
Olympic and the Trocadière, which is decked out with screens, with this
year two screening areas reserved for the visual arts (creations by
Pleix, the VJ collective Addictive TV, etc.), film concerts (Truffaz
sets Ozu\'s Tokyo Kids to music and Eisenstein\'s NLF3 Que Viva Mexico)
and audiovisual shows: the essential VJ/DJ Hexstatic, the playful
electro of Gangpol on the kawaii visuals of Mit, or Labland, \"visual
music\" born from the collaboration of Berlin VJs Pfadfinderei and the
electro hip-hop duo Modeselektor. Equally enticing, the London white
funk quintet Hot Chip, the relentless techno of Vitalic, The Hacker and
Miss Kittin, the refined minimal house of Chloé and Superpitcher, or the
poisonous New York rock of Blonde Redhead. In this high-class musical
program, we will not forget the young duo Principles of Geometry, one of
the main hopes of French electronica, and the concert of the strange
Moodyman.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1658

Protecting computer data is something that SMEs can never stress enough,
say companies specializing in this field. For their part, SMEs do
everything they can to keep the costs of their computer equipment---what
some call their information assets---as low as possible. Where is the
happy medium? According to Michèle Saint-Jean, vice-president of GTI
Canada, a firm specializing in risk management, computer hardware
security, like everything else, must answer a single question: \"What
does your company need to start over after a disaster?\" To answer this
question, consider where your company stands in relation to the
following issues, four major challenges if your SME\'s main source of
revenue is limited to a handful of computer files. 1. Confidentiality
The ISO standard on information protection (17799.2000) teaches managers
of intangible data how to be shielded against the blows of fate. Given
the scandals of recent years, it is important to be able to track files
that are more or less secret, to prove their confidentiality or, at the
very least, their protection. In other words, you have to keep proof of
the protection of your data, to face the law, in the event of
information disclosure. Companies in the inter-company, or B2B
(business-to-business) sector, are particularly at risk in this regard,
notes Ms. Saint-Jean. \"Their business model is based on intangibles,\"
she says. \"If they cannot prove in court, by presenting concrete
documents, that they ensured the confidentiality of their computer
files, they will be found wanting and could be prosecuted.\" The news of
the past few years illustrates this situation well. The example closest
to us is probably that of the Société de l\'assurance automobile du
Québec (SAAQ). A few years ago, the SAAQ was infiltrated by moles who
used its data to obtain the addresses of people they were looking for.
2. Integrity The integrity of documents must also be ensured. This means
that data falsification must be impossible. If it does occur, it must be
detected and, ideally, corrected. \"This leads us to discuss password
management, which is too often neglected by companies,\" believes the
spokesperson for GTI Canada. A company that wants to ensure that its
password system is functional must establish a policy regarding these
keywords. Their composition (length, type of characters) must vary, as
must their useful life. Studies suggest changing all passwords every
month if they are to be used seriously. According to Michèle Saint-Jean,
the use of a firewall is also questioned. \"Most of the time, break-ins
into computer systems occur from the inside,\" she assures. 3.
Accessibility Paradoxically, despite all the precautions aimed at
limiting access to a company\'s computer data, accessibility must not be
compromised. The company must ensure that, in 10 years, the files saved
today will still be compatible with commonly used software. This is a
problem that will probably be experienced by many users of software
whose saved files are of the \"proprietary\" type (proprietary format).
This includes the famous .doc and .xls of the Microsoft Office suite,
incompatible with other software suites. In this specific case, the free
software community is fiercely promoting the same universal file format.
Obviously, there are more pragmatic solutions than waiting for the
outcome of this saga. Relying on security backups in RTF (Rich-Text
Format) format, for word processing, is just one example. 4. Security
Natural disasters, such as fire or flood, must also be taken into
account. So, a backup copy is essential, but keeping this copy in the
same place as the original data does not solve the problem. Just like
taking home the laptop loaned by the office, when it contains data
deemed sensitive for a company, is not exactly recommended by IT
security experts. In both cases, it is better to rely on a network that
includes a server, where the company files are stored, and also have a
backup copy on a remote server. This is a solution that could save your
company a lot of hassle. alain.mckenna@lapresse.ca

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1659

Alain Le Diberder, former director of new programs at Canal +, whose
websites he launched, chairs CLVE, a software development company for
new media. He is the author of several books on television and video
games, including Who\'s Afraid of Video Games? (La Découverte, Paris,
1993), and has just published Révolution numérique et industries
culturelles, with Philippe Chantepie (La Découverte). Console
manufacturers are displaying immense multimedia ambitions. Do you think
they have the means to achieve them? This is anything but a new
discourse! For at least ten years, video game manufacturers have been
saying that the console is the future center of the home. Thanks to it,
we will be able to play games, but also watch films, listen to music,
connect to the Internet\... Some have actually taken action: Philips and
especially Sega and its Dreamcast, designed with Internet access. It
didn\'t work, because broadband was not yet sufficiently developed. The
question now is to examine the relevance of this industry, which plans
the obsolescence of its products every five years. Because I don\'t
believe that consumers will agree to change their equipment
indefinitely. It\'s possible, if need be, when it\'s just video games.
But not if it also concerns films and music\... In reality, I believe
that people will buy these consoles to play and nothing else. How can we
explain the manufacturers\' confidence? Quite simply because the console
has the advantage of already being installed under the television, in
the living room. That said, we must also understand that they are not
the only ones in this niche. I\'m thinking of smartphones, which are
simpler and less expensive and are developing at full speed. Or the
Freebox, which has just announced that, thanks to free software, you can
read all the content of your PC on your television. There are also
products like the iPod, or even Archos portable screens that are
establishing themselves in this market. This armada of technical
solutions tends to show that there is indeed a movement in the direction
of the convergence of industries. Do you believe in a merger of the
video game, film and music industries, with large groups that will
produce CDs, films or games indifferently? This movement has already
taken place, ten years ago. All the American majors as well as groups
like Canal Plus, where I worked at the time, created their own
interactive department. This was a failure, because video games remain a
specific business and the operation of the majors remains very
compartmentalized. Sony, for example, is a major player in music and
film and yet it does not exploit its productions exclusively for its
video game branch. The only counter-example is George Lucas who
controlled everything from A to Z for his films, games and Star Wars
derivative products. But Lucas is a somewhat unusual guy. Will the
creativity of the video game sector be able to meet the increasingly
important demand of consumers? As with Hollywood blockbusters, video
games suffer from a certain sterility, with concepts and formulas that
are too recurrent. This is proof that what works best in video games is
marketing. On the other hand, we must also consider that the greatest
successes, such as GTA or the Sims in particular, are not adaptations of
films or major overpriced licenses. They are intelligent titles, not
very expensive in terms of development, but which present an innovative
concept. This is why I always believe, whatever the trends in the
sector, in the emergence of exciting initiatives.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1660

Europe does not yet recognise the possibility of protecting software
inventions with patents. But its point of view could change. Tomorrow,
the twenty-five members of the European Commission\'s Legal Affairs
Committee will examine the 256 amendments tabled by MEPs. The draft
directive will then be submitted to the European Parliament for a vote
on 6 July. This debate divides professionals. On the one hand, small
companies, often from the world of Linux free software, are fiercely
opposed to the patent, which they believe risks giving pride of place to
large American publishers. They are supported by French companies such
as Ilog. The rapporteur of the directive, Michel Rocard, chairman of the
European Parliament\'s Culture Committee, was sensitive to their
arguments. He tabled forty amendments. \"The patent, if adopted, will
strengthen monopolies. This is not a solution because software is
already protected by copyright in Europe. If the patent were adopted for
software, the concepts could be protected. However, an algorithm is like
a mathematical formula that cannot be protected by a patent,\" explains
Georg Greve, president of the FreeSoftwareFoundation in Europe. Faced
with its \"antis\", Eicta, which brings together large European
companies (Alcatel, Thales, Nokia, Philips, etc.) and employers\'
federations in the telecoms and electronics sectors, is mobilizing. Mark
MacGann, its general director, assures that he is \"perplexed by Michel
Rocard\'s position\". He accuses the former prime minister of \"false
debate\" and of having a vision that dates back \"to the 1950s\".
According to Eicta, it is \"not a question of patenting pure software\",
but of protecting \"inventions implemented by computer\". Several tens
of thousands of patents have already been taken out in Europe on
software in anticipation of the directive. In order to clarify the
situation, European deputies clearly want to exclude pure software from
the scope of the patent. If Parliament were to adopt this text by a
two-thirds majority, Eicta threatens to request \"the abandonment of the
directive\". Because it believes that innovation would then be
threatened in Europe.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1661

The Xiti analysis firm published, on Monday, June 13, the results of a
survey on the growing adoption of the Mozilla Firefox web browser by
European Internet users. The survey covered approximately 23 million
connections to sites hosted on the Old Continent. It indicates that
Firefox represents 14.08% of Internet traffic. Since its launch in the
fall of 2004, the web browser has been steadily eating into the
quasi-monopoly held by Microsoft with Internet Explorer (IE), which is
nevertheless integrated as standard into the Windows operating system.
France is slightly above the European average, with 14.42% of traffic
attributed to Firefox. Roughly the same level as the United Kingdom
(13.03%) or Austria (14.79%); ahead of Lithuania (7%), Italy (10.29%) or
Ireland (10.56%); behind Hungary (22.06%), Germany (24.36%) and Finland,
whose traffic attributed to Firefox peaks at over 30%. According to
Xiti, these rates are increasing in all the countries studied, with the
exception of Luxembourg and the Principality of Monaco. Conducted at the
end of the week, the study presented does not take into account Internet
traffic generated by employees of companies that have often remained
loyal to IE. Strictly speaking, the figures put forward do not provide
any indication of how the market is now divided between the two
browsers. However, they do provide a snapshot of Firefox\'s growing
popularity among individuals. NON-PROFIT STRUCTURE Like the Linux
operating system, Firefox belongs to the category of free software -
free, open and collaboratively developed - which represents a small but
worrying threat to Microsoft. Firefox is therefore not developed and
distributed by a commercial company. It comes from a non-profit
organization, the Mozilla Foundation, created in the summer of 2003 by a
group of former Netscape engineers. Fired after AOL-Time Warner (owner
of Netscape) won its lawsuit against Microsoft and received \$750
million, these programmers received a \$2 million grant from their
former employer to continue their development work within a foundation.
The American software giant - which is seeing one of its products lose
market share for the first time - is preparing its response. The next
version of its browser, expected this summer, will integrate one of the
features that made its competitor successful: tabbed browsing, which
allows you to open several web pages in the same frame. In addition to
ergonomics issues - and although flaws have been discovered in
Firefox\'s source code - security is one of the main reasons for
abandoning IE in favor of its new competitor. Microsoft has thus
committed to making the next version of IE more secure than previous
ones.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1662

Net-art is dead, long live rock\'n\'roll? The online exhibition \"Why
rock?\" draws up a playlist of Net-artists who have started singing or
venturing onto the stage. For what obscure reason did they come out of
their mute screens to expose themselves to the spotlight? Like the
Pavarotti of code, the Slovenian Igor Stromajer, who sang an HTML text
in the lair of the Ljubljana opera, or the Russian Alexei Shulgin,
founder of the first \"cyberpunkrockband\", who makes his antediluvian
computer crackle great pop hits, from California Dreaming to Rape Me, in
a nasal synthesized voice. The rock attitude is also no stranger to the
crazy performances of the Pavu collective with the group\'s hyberbard,
Clément Thomas, who transposes insulting messages broadcast on mailing
lists into song (Flame Song). \"Is it just to make a childhood dream
come true? Is it a desire to make the body present on the screen? Is it
because we believe that the rock stars of the 21st century will come
from the Internet?\" or, more prosaically, \"is it a need to become more
pop(ular)?\", ask the two curators of the exhibition. Intrigued by these
postures, Annie Abrahams, Net-artist, and Clément Charmet, from the
group Thirtytwobit (versed in computer torture), tried to list the Net
stars with an affinity for rock in this web-exhibition hosted by
Turbulence and Panoplie: Cory Arcangel, chipmusic tinkerer, member of
the Beige collective and 8-bit Construction Set, Richard Stallman, guru
of free software whose anthem is said to be his Free-Software Song, the
angry collective vnatrc, which campaigns for free music, but also Alan
Sondheim and Frédéric Madre, who treat the reader to a text for the
exhibition, Talan Memmott, host of the hypertext literature review
Beehive, who says he rubbed shoulders with punks in his youth\... \"I
think that the rock attitude is the healthy expression of a body in
need,\" says Annie Abrahams. \"Net artists manipulate the archetypal
figure of the rock star all the better because they operate in a world
where the audience is easily accessible, the staging is omnipresent and
its diffusion is immediate,\" believes Clément Charmet. \"Not to mention
that in a world as impersonal and anonymous as the Web, the counterpoint
of adopting the megalomaniac narcissism of the rocker, even if it is to
ridicule it, can be extremely satisfying.\" And he concludes: \"Isn\'t
the computer the instrument that gives all its meaning to the \"do it
yourself\" aesthetic launched by the punks?\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1663

Brussels - Relations seem to be calming down between Microsoft, which
has made a number of concessions, and the European Commission, which
until a few days ago was determined to impose new fines on the American
giant. Monday, the first act of reconciliation. Within a few hours of
each other, the Commission and Microsoft announced that the American had
come closer to Brussels\' demands. Fourteen months earlier, the
Commission had condemned the group for abuse of a dominant position,
imposing a record fine of 497 million euros (760 million Canadian
dollars). Demand Brussels has above all demanded that the software
leader market a version of its flagship Windows operating system without
the audio and video software player Media Player and that it disclose
information allowing the interoperability of Windows with competing
products. Tired of the American\'s prevarications, European Competition
Commissioner Neelie Kroes decreed at the end of May that she would stop
all discussions on 1 June. If Microsoft\'s latest proposals to implement
the \"corrective measures\" are still insufficient, it will exercise its
right to impose daily penalty payments on the group calculated on its
turnover and which could be as high as 5 million euros (7.5 million
Canadian dollars). Concessions To everyone\'s surprise, Microsoft
announced \"significant concessions\" on Monday on the interoperability
front, agreeing in particular to disclose certain information free of
any royalties and to distribute interoperable products worldwide and not
just in Europe. The only stumbling block: the group still refuses to
allow free software publishers who have access to this information to
circulate it among the entire free software community. Aware of this
inadequacy, the Commission nevertheless suggests that it will not carry
out its threat of a fine, at least not immediately. It prefers to wait
for the European courts, to which Microsoft has filed an appeal, to
deliver its ruling, scheduled for mid-2006. Second act of
reconciliation: on Wednesday, Microsoft announced that it would
distribute in Europe, within a week, versions of Windows purged of Media
Player and taking into account the \"latest clarifications from the
Commission\". A project that Brussels says it \"welcomes favourably\".
However, \"the game is not over\", warns Thomas Vinje, lawyer for major
industrialists such as IBM, Nokia and Red Hat, who support the
Commission in its fight. Yesterday, the Commission also stressed that
\"the verification of conformity (to corrective measures) is an ongoing
process and we reserve the right to review certain aspects of this
version if it turns out, during the market test, that it presents
certain functional problems\". On the other hand, Brussels refuses to
comment on the absence of a price difference between the full version
and the truncated version of Windows, a practice which in itself kills
the effectiveness of the corrective measure, because who would buy a
less complete product for the same price? It is difficult for the
Commission to criticize such a maneuver when, in its 2004 decision, it
failed to mention a possible price difference\... However, believes Mr.
Vinje, \"the Commission still has the possibility of acting on this,
perhaps not in the context of the March 2004 decision, but it can open
another procedure\". \"It is the determination of the Commission which
forced Microsoft to back down on a certain number of points\", he
applauds, considering that the Commission acted \"wisely\" in choosing
to \"concentrate its energy on winning before the Court, before ensuring
the application of the corrective measures\". It will then be time to
reopen the \"fundamental\" battle on the front of free software
publishers, \"the only potential competitors\" according to him of the
Redmond giant.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1664

Microsoft took an important step yesterday in resolving its long-running
dispute with the European Commission over how to improve the dialogue
between its flagship Windows program and competitors\' products. Its
latest proposals on the matter have been welcomed by the EU executive,
with the threat of a maximum fine of \$5 million per day receding. The
Commission said it was satisfied with most of the software giant\'s new
proposals to comply with its demands. \"I am pleased that Microsoft has
agreed to some principles that should underpin the implementation of the
Commission\'s decision,\" said Neelie Kroes, the European Commissioner
for Competition. \"To resolve some complex issues in recent weeks, we
have made some important concessions,\" said Steve Ballmer, Microsoft\'s
CEO. \"We take our responsibilities in Europe very seriously and will
continue to meet our obligations in every way we can.\" » The software
empire has however acknowledged that it has not reached an agreement
with the Commission on the possibility for makers of \"open source\"
software to benefit from sensitive information on Microsoft technology.
Microsoft has confirmed that the European Commission will \"test\" the
new measures proposed by the American software publisher with the
computer industry. Regarding the rights to be paid on some of the
information that it is now obliged to disclose, Microsoft has agreed
that the level of these \"will be set in such a way that it allows other
producers to use it\" without creating commercial difficulties.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1665

Microsoft CEO Steve Ballmer announced yesterday that he had made
concessions to meet the European Commission\'s transparency
requirements. Brussels, for its part, assured that Microsoft had come
closer to what it wanted. The world\'s number one software company
notably agreed that a category of information it would be obliged to
disclose would be royalty-free. \"To resolve some complex issues in
recent weeks, we have made some significant concessions,\" Ballmer said.
\"We take our responsibilities in Europe very seriously and we will
continue to meet all of our obligations in every way possible.\" The
software empire, however, acknowledged that it had not reached an
agreement with the Commission on the fact that manufacturers of \"open
source\" software, i.e. its main competitors, could benefit from
sensitive information on Microsoft technology. Microsoft confirmed that
the European Commission would \"test\" the new measures proposed by the
American software publisher with the IT industry. Regarding the
royalties to be paid on some of the information it is now forced to
disclose, Microsoft has agreed that the level of these \"should be set
in such a way that it allows other producers to use them\" without
creating commercial difficulties. Brussels condemned the software empire
in March 2004 for abuse of a dominant position. Brussels had mainly
demanded that the group market a version of its flagship Windows
operating system without the audio and video software player Media
Player.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1666

There is bad blood between French photographers and Adobe, the American
giant of digital image software (Photoshop, Illustrator, Acrobat, etc.).
The cause: in the latest version of its products, Adobe has \"wired\" a
link to a photo library containing the main \"royalty-free\" image
banks, i.e. on which photographers have waived all copyright: Getty
Images, Comstock, DigitalVision and others. \"Creative people no longer
need to leave our software to consult image banks. They can do it
directly from the application; everything is integrated and therefore
simpler,\" they rejoice at Adobe. At the Union of Creative Photographers
(UPC), one of the main professional associations (1,500 members), people
are choking. \"Royalty-free photos have already harmed photographers.
\"With the integration that Adobe is implementing, the phenomenon can
only grow,\" worries Jorge Alvarez, Secretary General of the UPC. Adobe
software, and especially its star product, Photoshop, are carving out a
major share of the market. In fact, many photographers use them. Now
these tools are going to automatically redirect to this world without
copyright that professionals abhor. As a result, the UPC is demanding
that the link to the Adobe photo library be removed from the software.
Otherwise? \"We will consider a boycott of the products,\" threatens
Alvarez, who points out that the open source sector (free software)
offers a credible (and free) alternative to Photoshop with the Gimp
program. \"Adobe is very concerned about people paying for the licenses
for its software (around 1,000 euros for Photoshop, editor\'s note) but
on the other hand, this company seems to have little regard for
intellectual property among photographers,\" denounces the secretary
general of the UPC. At Adobe, people are upset. \"The world of
professional photographers is very important to us,\" assures Jean-Luc
Petorin, European head of marketing for creative professionals. But he
considers the concerns unjustified: \"Using royalty-free image banks is
a work reflex among creatives. We are only giving them easier access to
this daily tool.\" However, he admits that Adobe is doing more than
improving its tools: the company will, as an intermediary, take a
commission on each sale of royalty-free photos made via its software
platforms. Adobe therefore has a financial interest in the development
of this type of business. Perhaps anticipating this type of trial, Adobe
has decided to put online in each country a directory of photographers
who are members of professional associations, this for software users
who are not satisfied with \"royalty free\". But does this really
compensate for that? Funny detail: Adobe has been one of the sponsors of
the UPC since last year, contributing a few thousand euros to its
funding! This partnership has apparently not encouraged dialogue: during
the demonstration days organized last week by Adobe at the Cité des
sciences in Paris, members of the UPC were reduced to distributing
leaflets in lecture halls to alert professionals to the concerns of
photographers.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1667

Programmers who are dissatisfied with Google\'s limitations regularly
create new websites that draw on the search giant\'s databases to offer
a service that the search giant had not thought of. Some ideas are
brilliant, others are completely useless, like a Google results page!
Google may have gone public and is making money like water, but that
doesn\'t stop it from remaining true to its roots, which are in the free
software community - that programmer\'s paradise, where everyone can
freely tweak each other\'s software. That\'s why it is the only search
engine to freely offer its APIs (application program interfaces) to the
public, which is like the grocery basket you have in your kitchen. To
continue with the culinary metaphor, let\'s say that Google allows the
public to make sunny-side-up eggs with the ingredients of its omelette.
So a programmer can decide to improve Google himself by creating
software that draws its power from the search giant\'s eight billion
pages. Even the use of the Google trademark does not seem to pose a
problem to the interested party, since everyone appropriates it without
seeing a shadow of a lawyer. A few Google offshoots In recent years,
Google offshoots have multiplied. Here are a few. The most interesting
idea is that of Housing Maps (www.paulrademacher.com/housing ), a site
that combines data from Google Maps road maps with that of the popular
free classifieds service Craigslist (which also offers its APIs to the
public), to display housing for sale or rent on the maps of about twenty
North American cities. This allows you to immediately locate Craigslist
ads on the map of Montreal (montreal.craigslist.org). On the map, we see
immediately that Craigslist Montreal is especially popular among English
speakers (which is a shame, because it is very useful); the housing is
mainly in the West Island. Geobloggers (geobloggers.com) has combined
Google Maps with the popular personal photo album site Flickr
(www.flickr.com ) to show every place in a given city that people have
taken a photo of. That\'s a lot, a lot of photos. Perfect for showing
off your graffiti photos in a techno way, and renaming them \"pictorial
anthropology of urban wastelands\" without anyone batting an eyelid.
Google Talk (douweosinga.com/projects/googletalk) combats writer\'s
block (and encourages plagiarism) by allowing users to dig into
Google\'s pages for the rest of an incomplete sentence. If you type
\"attache ta tuque avec,\" it adds \"de la broche.\" But it gets weirder
the more you type (it\'s designed for English, so avoid accents).
Sensitive or logical minds need not apply. Google Battle
(douweosinga.com/projects/googlebattle) compares the rate at which two
terms appear on the web, allowing you to determine who is more popular,
Rembrandt or Van Gogh (it\'s Rembrandt, by five to three with a
brushstroke in the last period). Google Poetry
(douweosinga.com/projects/visualpoetry) draws on Google\'s image search
engine to translate the sentence you propose into images corresponding
to the keywords, which gives completely unexpected results. If you write
\"I went to Montreal this summer,\" the word \"Montreal\" gives a view
of the city center, while the word \"summer\" offers a sunset on the
Jacques-Cartier bridge. The word \"am,\" meanwhile, returns a fat naked
woman in the fetal position, which induces in you a metaphysical state
worthy of the most profound Albanian films.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1668

The Internet, however ambivalent it may be (a control and marketing
apparatus on the one hand, a place of emancipation and collective
creation on the other), has profoundly changed social and artistic
practices. LOGS, a new collection launched by èÆe editions, offers, with
this first volume devoted to \"cooperation\", elements of reflection on
networked spaces. The pleasantly eclectic work invites authors from
diverse backgrounds (science fiction, philosophy, art, sociology,
economics, computer science, etc.) including Olivier Blondeau, Patrick
Bernier, Bureau d\'études, Jean-Paul Fourmentraux, Bernard Guelton,
Bernard Stiegler, etc. Conceived as a critical toolbox by its authors
(Lib\_ laboratory, led by Silvia Argüello and Jérôme Joy), LOGS
articulates in an original way texts or extracts of all kinds, essays,
fictions, etc. already published or unpublished which nourish the
hypotheses put forward by Lib\_. Among which, the crucial one of
individual emancipation. \"What must be noted are the conditions that
mean that, in these networked devices, the collective does not immerse
the individual, does not consume him, does not standardize him, quite
the contrary\", suggests the composer Jérôme Joy (1), echoing the
philosopher Bernard Stiegler for whom the cultural industry destroys the
individual. From free software to online performances, from flash mobs
to networked democracy, from intellectual property to the culture of
giving, cooperation, through forums, discussion lists, chats, blogs, is
the common thread of these networked spaces that erase the usual
distinction between producer and consumer. Exemplary in this respect,
the SF novel by the American Jean-Michel Smith punctuating LOGS: the
author published the text online under a free license as it was written,
the French translation being provided by a team of volunteers. \"These
collective spaces of individual emancipation are spaces of invention and
creation (and not of commercial and industrial uses and behaviors),
maintains Jérôme Joy, whether they are artistic (online projects),
technical (open source workshops and sharing of technical resources) or
social (mailing lists). Generalized consumption would be salutarily
responded to by deliberate circulation, and to social futility, by the
voluntary construction of networks.\" (1) Who is participating today in
the debate \"From the electronic creation laboratory to the sharing of
knowledge\" (www.te05.org/article.php3?id_article=73) on the occasion of
the \"Electronic Territories\" in Aix-en-Provence.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1669

The arm wrestling match between Microsoft and the European Commission
continues. As demanded by Neelie Kroes, the European Commissioner for
Competition, the software giant submitted its proposals yesterday
evening. Tired of the lack of cooperation from the firm founded by Bill
Gates, Neelie Kroes had given it an ultimatum that expired at midnight
(our editions of Monday, May 30). She had even threatened Microsoft with
a daily fine of up to \$5 million if the group did not submit concrete
proposals. \"Contacts continued late Tuesday evening,\" explained
Jonathan Todd, the spokesperson for the European Commissioner for
Competition, Neelie Kroes. \"We will now examine what they have put on
the table.\" At Microsoft, a spokesperson simply stated that \"proposals
had been submitted to the Commission. We are awaiting their response.\"
The stakes are high because Brussels is demanding that Microsoft market
a version of its flagship Windows program that does not include the
MediaPlayer software that allows users to listen to music and watch
videos on their personal computers. The issue is also technical. This
explains why Brussels services are asking for several weeks to analyze
Microsoft\'s proposals in detail. Brussels hopes that these measures
will give new life to the software empire\'s competitors. This objective
explains why it also wants the American giant to share certain
information with these competitors marketing free software. \"These
publishers are today the only real challengers to Windows on the server
market,\" explains a person familiar with the issue. Microsoft assures
for its part that it respects Brussels\' requirements. It has already
developed a version of Windows without the Media Player program. This
must still receive approval from Brussels. But some experts doubt the
effectiveness of such a measure if the group sells the two versions of
Windows with or without MediaPlayer at the same price. Its American
competitor RealNetworks, founded by Rob Glaser, a former Microsoft
employee, fears such a situation. It has developed a software that
competes with MediaPlayer called RealPlayer. Its directors have been
waging an anti-Microsoft crusade for several months. They pleaded their
case in Brussels by citing the example of the Netscape Internet browser
to demonstrate the omnipotence of the firm founded by Bill Gates.
Netscape, which had been chosen by many consumers in the 1990s, saw its
market share decline when Microsoft decided to integrate its own
Internet browsing program into Windows. For their part, computer
manufacturers have already declared that they do not want to equip their
machines with a version of Windows stripped of MediaPlayer.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1670

COMPETITION. The organizers of the 6th Du grain à démoudre film festival
(from October 7 to 15 in Gonfreville-l\'Orcher, Seine-Maritime) are
organizing a screenwriting competition on the theme of the absurd, for
those under 25, until June 15. Screenplays must be three to five pages
long. The winners will be judged at the festival (transport,
accommodation and activities paid for) and their screenplays will be
read by actors and then posted online. Info: www.dugrainademoudre.net
CONFERENCE. ISG Finance, the financial association of the Institut
supérieur de gestion, is organizing a round table on the theme: \"The
Weight of Shareholders on Corporate Decisions\", on June 6 at 6 p.m. at
the ISG premises. This conference will be hosted by Michel Guithaux
(business consultant and professor at the University of Paris-XII) in
the presence of Pierre Bilger (former CEO of Alstom), Michel Aglietta
(professor at Paris-X, advisor to CEPII), Joseph Gouranton (president of
Adacte) and Emmanuel Paquette (economic journalist). Free admission.
Meet at 8, rue de Lota, Paris XVI e. Info.: 06.61.63.02.32 or
hadrien.gausseres@gmail.com CONFERENCE-DEBATE. The École nationale
d\'assurances and its president, François Ewald, welcome the
mathematician Benoît Mandelbrot who will speak about the impacts of
fractal theory on insurance. The event will take place on Wednesday,
June 1 at 6 p.m. at Enass, 8, rue Chaptal 75009 Paris, M° Saint-Georges.
Info. : Laure Tequi : 01.44.63.58.05. SPORT. From July 5 to 10, at the
Stade de la Grenouillère in the Parc de Sceaux, the 20th BNP
Paribas-Open de France will take place. This disabled tennis tournament
will bring together 120 players. Free entry. Stade de la Grenouillère,
Parc de Sceaux, Antony (92). Info.: www.tennishandisport.com COMPUTING.
The ESGI (École supérieure de génie informatique), a school specializing
in development, systems and network engineering, is organizing in
partnership with the Slyunix association, a "Linux and free software"
day, on Saturday, June 4, from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. On the program:
multimedia presentations, self-service demonstrations, meetings with
users, installation of your machine and a distribution of Linux and free
software CDs. Many conferences are also planned. Free and open access.
See you on Saturday, June 4 from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. at the ESGI, 28, rue
du Plateau, Paris XIX e. Info.: 01.42.41.24.24 or www.esgi.fr CONCERT.
The association Musique en Sorbonne presents a concert by the Choir and
Orchestra of Paris-Sorbonne, conducted by Jacques Grimbert, on Friday,
June 24 at the Church of the Trinity. With Virginie Besson, soprano,
Blandine Staskiewicz, mezzo, Mathias Vidal, tenor, and Jean-Vincent
Blot, baritone. They will perform Stabat Mater by Rossini. Prices: 20;
under 25s, 10 . At 8:30 p.m. at the Church of the Trinity, place
Estienne-d\'Orves, Paris 9 e. Info. Music at the Sorbonne, 2, rue
Francis-de-Croisset, Paris XVIII e or 01.42.62.71.71.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1671

Brussels - Microsoft has only a few hours left to comply with Brussels\'
injunctions, failing which the European Commission could decide to
impose daily penalty payments of around \$5 million on the American
giant. After months of procrastination, the European Commissioner for
Competition, Neelie Kroes, finally banged her fist on the table a week
ago. No more hours of negotiations. Microsoft has therefore been given
an ultimatum of midnight on May 31. By tomorrow evening, the world\'s
number one software company must have satisfactorily implemented the
\"corrective measures\" imposed in March 2004 by Brussels, or face
having to pay a daily penalty payment that could represent up to 5% of
its daily global turnover. Convicted of abuse of a dominant position,
the Redmond group has already paid a fine of 497 million euros. It must
also market a version of its flagship Windows operating system without
the Media Player audio and video software player and disclose
information allowing the \"interoperability\" of Windows, which is used
on 95% of personal computers, with competing products. Microsoft has not
changed its tune and one of its spokesmen in Brussels still claims that
the group \"is working with the Commission to achieve full compliance\".
For its part, the Commission repeats that it is not negotiating because
its decision is \"non-negotiable\". Microsoft just has to provide proof
that it will meet its requirements. The rapprochement between the two
parties seems all the less obvious since their interpretation of the
March 2004 decision differs. \"The words are very simple, but the act is
much more complex\", Microsoft stresses. The most crucial point remains
interoperability, which would mean for Microsoft revealing its juicy, as
well as sacrosanct, protocols. The Commission is not very appreciative
of the ban on vendors of free or open source software, such as Linux,
from acquiring a license. Because, as a source close to the case points
out, free software is today \"the only real challenger to Windows on the
server market.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1672

NEW YORK from our correspondent - It is gradually creating a system
offering functions identical to Windows, but via the Internet Google had
barely existed for two years when, on June 8, 2000, the trial against
Microsoft for \"abuse of dominant position\" almost went badly for the
group founded by Bill Gates. Convicted at first instance and on appeal
in the largest antitrust trial in history since that of John
Rockefeller\'s Standard Oil in 1911, the world\'s number one software
company had nevertheless ultimately escaped the dismantling ordered by
federal judge Thomas Penfield Jackson. Indeed, two months after the
attacks of September 11, the Justice Department disavowed what it had
done under the Clinton presidency and used the difficult period as a
pretext to conclude an amicable transaction very favorable to Microsoft.
Today, it is not justice but Google that is considered the greatest
threat to Microsoft\'s hegemony. The search engine star is gradually
creating a parallel system, offering functions identical to Windows but
via the Internet. Google is no longer betting on decentralized
computing, but on the contrary intends to provide its users with the
largest and most powerful computer system in the world. The
confrontation is reminiscent of those of the past, between the operating
systems of Microsoft, IBM and Apple in the 1980s or between the browsers
Netscape and Internet Explorer in the 1990s. A former Microsoft
executive, Tod Nielsen, explained in an interview with the New York
Times that some time ago the group would have quickly added an Internet
search function to Windows to face Google. \"We would have also found a
way to torpedo their business model,\" he adds. OTHERS HAVE BURNED THEIR
WINGS This strategy of constantly adding functions to Windows has
allowed Microsoft to marginalize Apple and Netscape. But today, the firm
is hesitant. Longhorn, its operating system that is to replace Windows,
has been significantly delayed. It should only be released at the end of
2006. It will reportedly include search software, and Microsoft will
ensure with its lawyers that the risks of antitrust lawsuits are
minimized. But the underlying issue remains the same. Microsoft believes
it has an inalienable right to add features to its operating system: an
Internet browser, a music and video player, antivirus software, a search
system, etc. By following this strategy, and by offering its enhanced
system at no extra cost to more than 90% of personal computer users
worldwide, Microsoft has been in the habit of creating a standard in a
matter of months or years. Google is not unaware of the threat and says
so explicitly in its annual report. Its CEO, Eric Schmidt, knows his
subject well; he already clashed with Microsoft when he worked at the
computer groups Sun Microsystems and Novell. Having become a more
cautious, more bureaucratic company in a more mature market, Microsoft
retains two considerable assets in the form of two monopolies: the
Windows operating system and the Office desktop applications. Even if
the free software Linux is successful in the server field and if Apple
with its OS X system offers greater security and superior technology to
those of Microsoft, the firm founded by Bill Gates retains an
overwhelming domination. Preserving it seems to be its only strategy
today, at least in the field of computing. To counter it, and not to
suffer the fate of Netscape and other companies that have burned their
wings by wanting to confront Microsoft too closely, \"Google must in
turn become a little evil itself\", recommends the very serious
Technology Review, the magazine of the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology (MIT) which devoted an article to Google in January. Which
means, in plain English, that the company must adopt some of the
strategy that brought Microsoft victory, but also earned it a lot of
animosity from the software development community. Google should thus
transform its search engine technology into a de facto standard, capable
of imposing its rules on software developers who want to create
applications requiring the use of Google.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1673

Americans have a tasty adage to express the fact that everything has its
price: There is no such thing as a free lunch. But as appealing as it
may be, this formula is becoming less and less viable, as a handful of
web enthusiasts in Montreal prove every day. The gradual implementation
of a free wireless Internet access system across the island shows that
it is indeed possible to enjoy a free meal\... if, of course, an army of
volunteers agrees to devote time and energy to the cause. Let\'s first
define the concept behind the initiative: Wi-Fi (wireless fidelity).
This is a technology that allows laptops equipped with a wireless card
to connect to the Internet, as if by magic, within a radius of several
dozen meters to several kilometers. A business that wants to offer its
customers such a service only has to pay a few dollars to get a small
transmitter and thus become a \"hot spot.\" Posters advertising free
Internet access are currently multiplying at a frantic pace in Montreal
bars and cafés. Saint-Laurent Street, for example, is completely covered
in Wi-Fi from Sherbrooke Street to Mont-Royal Avenue. Interestingly,
this excitement does not come from big players like Videotron or Rogers
but rather from a modest non-profit organization that is the leader in
this technology on the island. Which obviously explains why the service
is free. Île sans fil, a small team of about thirty volunteers, has been
working hard for two years to increase the number of hot spots and, of
course, the number of users of the service. At last count, more than
5,500 users were benefiting from about fifty wireless terminals. That\'s
more than Videotron offers! The idea may seem crazy: professionals
investing their heart and soul in a project that doesn\'t earn them a
cent. Now, these pioneers, inspired by the philosophy of free software
and sharing with the greatest number, have no other goal than to
democratize access to new technologies. Some will argue that you still
need to have a laptop, a Wi-Fi card and be able to afford a \$4 latte to
take advantage of this free service. True. But we\'re not asking these
people to turn the planet upside down and put an end to capitalism! The
goal of this grassroots organization is rather to help break the
isolation of citizens at the local level. And so far, this challenge has
been met brilliantly\... without anyone\'s help. The City of Montreal,
without going as far as cities like Philadelphia that have decided to
municipalize Wi-Fi access, would also have every interest in looking
into this project. Île sans fil will probably not be able to continue
its growth without the help of one or two employees. A tiny \$100,000
grant would keep the wheel turning. Nothing but peccadilloes, in short,
for a project that allows citizens and tourists to benefit from a free
public service, to break the isolation of self-employed workers and
artists, and to get Montreal talked about all over the web. Not bad, for
such a ridiculous sum.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1674

It doesn\'t attract as many crowds as Cannes, won\'t reach the
referendum turnout, but will easily fill the French digital creation
scene, despite the vagaries of the sector (web design studios are far
from being in good shape, art centers are failing\...) and the slightly
self-interested side of the affair. The Flash Festival, named after the
technology that dominates graphic creation on the Net, is sponsored by
Macromedia (which will take advantage of it to make its last demo) and
hosted for four years by the Pompidou Center. The counterpart of this
visibility is the happy opening to other artistic forms, far from being
confined to a \"proprietary\" format (a whole artistic movement
advocates the emancipation of these formats, via software writing and
free software). The Flash Festival offers two days of focus on Net Art
and the intimate: conferences, interventions by authors of emblematic
sites (with guest of honor, the master of generative Jared Tarbell of
Levitated.net or the Canadian Jeoff Lillemon of the enigmatic
Oculart.net), installations and performances are on the program. Not to
mention the essential webjams. Online, the competition of sites and
animations is uneven: weak on animation, which nevertheless made the
great hours of Flash, it finds favor with sure values like Incandescence
or Incorect. We recommend going to click on the site of Agnès de Cayeux
(www.internetmonamour.net), a distorted mirror of online flirting. She
sets up a meeting with Mélanie, Delphine, Alexandra or Isabelle, in
their \"reading room\". At Beaubourg, the offline version of In my Room,
with actress, webcam and text to hear, will invent a form between live
performance and stage on the Net.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1675

INFORMATION. ESGI (Ecole supérieure de génie informatique), a leading
school specializing in development, systems and network engineering, is
organizing, in partnership with the Slyunix association, a \"Linux and
free software\" day on Saturday, June 4, from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. On the
program: multimedia presentations, self-service demonstrations, meetings
with users, installation of your machine and a distribution of Linux and
free software CDs. Many conferences are also planned. Free access. See
you on Saturday, June 4, from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. at ESGI, 28, rue du
Plateau, Paris-XIX e. Info. 01.42.41.24.24 or www.esgi.fr RAID. The
first edition of the Xtremaroc sports and humanitarian raid will take
place from June 18 to 26. Teams of four students will compete in four
sports disciplines: mountain and desert mountain biking, orienteering,
canoe waves and bike and run. Each team member will have to bring a
backpack filled with 10 kilos of school supplies to the Moroccan League
for the Protection of Children (under the aegis of UNICEF). The Raid
Xtremaroc is open to all students regardless of their education.
Association Xtrememaroc, Escem, 1, rue Léo-Delibes, BP 0535, Tours Cedex
3. Info. 02.47.71.72.69, xtremaroc@escem.fr or www.xtremaroc.com SPORT.
The Boyard Staps association will bring together 200 students from
French universities for a sports tournament from June 24 to 27. It will
take place on the island of Oléron, in the town of Saint-Georges
d\'Oléron. Over four days, students will take part in various sports and
festive activities. Two tournaments will be organized on Boyardville
beach: a beach volleyball tournament on Saturday, June 25, and a beach
soccer tournament on Sunday, June 26. Several theme evenings will be
organized. Prices: 130 including transport, camping pitch, catering,
tournaments, club entry and one drink per evening. Individual or group
registrations. Information and registration: www.boyardstaps.com
COMPETITION. The fourth edition of the European utility vehicle design
competition is launched this week. This year\'s theme is the
desertification of the countryside. The aim will be to propose a utility
vehicle dedicated to local services and adapted to rural areas. A total
prize of 5,000 will be distributed among the three winners. The winner
will be able to do an internship in the design office of a major car
manufacturer. Submission of copies before November 7. Info.
www.argusauto.com/trophees EVENING. The Point gamma evening organized by
Polytechnique students will be held on Saturday, June 4 on the school
campus in Palaiseau. The organizers have invited Superbus, The Servant,
La Ruda Salska, Elie Semoun and DJs Benny Benassi and Philippe B.
Prices: 23 in advance, 30 on site. From 8 p.m. Campus of the
Polytechnique school, route de Saclay, Palaiseau (91). Info.
www.pointgamma.com DEBATE. Jean-François Lamour, Minister of Youth,
Sports and Community Life and the Charter of the Grandes Écoles invite
you at 5 p.m. at ESCP-EAP for a conference and debate on individual and
community volunteering. ESCP-EAP, 79, av. of the Republic, Paris-XI e.
Rens. www.lacharte.net

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1676

Nokia launched yesterday in New York, for the first time in its history,
a product using a version of the free software Linux. This is a first
for Nokia, which has preferred to use its own software or that designed
by the British Symbian, of which the Finnish group is the main
shareholder. The latest Nokia product, called the 770 Internet Tablet,
is a wireless, high-speed Internet browser and this device does not have
a telephone function.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1677

Let\'s imagine: a travel enthusiast, living in San Francisco or
Strasbourg, surfs the Internet, from site to site, to find the
destination at the best price. But it is no longer on travel agency
sites that he makes his choice, but on those of the countries concerned.
These virtual tourist houses allow him to check the absence of attacks
in Ethiopia or monsoons in Cambodia at the time of his trip as well as
to put together as he pleases a \"salt route\" combining the Algerian
and Moroccan deserts or a stay with a local on the Senegalese Petite
Côte or even a \"voodoo\" tour in Benin. It is this rapprochement
between destination countries in the South and their potential customers
in the North that the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
(UNCTAD) intends to promote as part of its \"e-tourism for developing
countries\" initiative. As its former Secretary General, Rubens
Ricupero, stated, \"if the tourism sector is properly integrated into
development strategies, it can be the cornerstone of new productive
systems that will reduce poverty and better integrate these countries
into the global economy.\" The priority that seems necessary to give to
tourism is based on the observation of its importance in the economy of
the most disadvantaged countries. It is the main export item for 37 of
the 50 least developed countries (LDCs); it accounts for 57.7% of the
gross national product (GNP) of the Maldives and employs 37% of its
active population. On the other hand, it only accounts for 7.2% of the
GNP of a country with a tourist vocation like Cambodia and 3% of that of
Madagascar. These tourist sources could contribute significantly to
development if they were not the victims of \"leaks\". It is estimated,
in fact, that the least developed countries of Africa see 85% of their
tourism revenues escape them. Why? \"Because three-quarters of
tourists\' food is imported to the Caribbean,\" replies Jean-François
Baylocq, coordinator of the UNCTAD initiative. \"Because these countries
must buy their means of transport abroad and pay for foreign capital
invested in holiday infrastructure. In addition, the vertical
integration of operators from the North places these countries in a
situation of strong dependency: it is estimated that only 38% of tourist
revenue remains in Kenya. Not to mention the invisible or criminal leaks
of revenue, environmental destruction, etc.\" Minimizing these leaks and
maximizing the supply of local goods and services, breaking the monopoly
of operators from the North by taking advantage of the consumer\'s
desire to travel à la carte, reducing the digital divide that isolates
LDCs from world markets, banking on local small and medium-sized
enterprises: these multiple reasons convinced the eleventh session of
UNCTAD, meeting in Sao Paulo in June 2004, to launch an initiative on
electronic tourism, which is now in place. PLATFORMS The system involves
offering the countries concerned a computer platform running on free
software. The World Tourism Organization (WTO), a specialized agency of
the UN, has already published a comparative study on the ergonomics of
the sites and \"bouquets\" that could be built from these platforms
customized according to the countries. UNCTAD also offers to help
countries build their commercial offer in terms of tourism and crafts
and to set up the operation and financing of the platform.
Public-private partnerships, \"collaborative competitions\" organizing
the pooling of technical resources, training in sustainable tourism are
the instruments of this aid. Countries such as Angola, Benin,
Mauritania, Lebanon and Madagascar have expressed interest in the
initiative and could be the first to experiment with this flexible and
inexpensive tool, which would also allow countries in the South to
improve and control their image: today, in fact, it is to the Quai
d\'Orsay or the British Foreign Office that consumers turn first to find
out whether they can envisage a worry-free trip.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1678

Boston - Housed in a building designed by architect Ieoh Ming Pei,
MIT\'s \"Media Lab\" is a strange place. High-tech but messy, serious
but crazy, respectable but childish. Cables run everywhere, pizzas are
placed on keyboards, boxes of Lego next to the latest machines. It is
also the only place in the world where someone can assure you, in all
seriousness: \"In 20 years, when you need, say, a toaster, your computer
will make it right away.\" Amy Sun, the young woman who has just
promised the toaster of the future, is a student who works closely with
Neil Gershenfeld, the head of the Center for Bits and Atoms (CBA),
prophet of \"digital manufacturing.\" Everett, a Belgian Malinois
shepherd, follows her everywhere in the corridors. Former Lockheed
Martin employee Amy Sun, 30, explains: \"Your computer will search a
database for the open-source (copyright-free) plans for the toaster;
then a machine, the equivalent of your printer, will make it.\" She
seems to hesitate for a second, but goes further: \"If it\'s not big
enough for you, you could one day atomize it, and the machine will
recover its components (plastic, metal, etc.) to remake another one a
little bigger.\" Beside her, Sherry Lassiter, who manages the Fab Labs
network, adds: \"It sounds crazy, but we\'re much closer than we think.
We\'re starting to print DNA, or nanomachines\... Computers can also
build buildings in 3D\....\" Everett seems to approve. In this world of
mad scientists, if he started talking, we wouldn\'t be surprised.
Visionary The day we visited, the guru, Neil Gershensfeld, was not
there. \"He went to Europe to meet a very famous musician for a project,
but if I told you more, he would kill me,\" confides Sherry Lassiter.
Gershenfeld has just published FAB, a visionary book announcing the
revolution of \"PFs\" (personal fabricators), which will be, he assures
us, even more upsetting than that of PCs (personal computers). Bearded,
bespectacled and overexcited, he is originally a physicist, also a
tinkerer. In his book, he says that he became aware of the potential of
\"personal fabrication\" in 1998, when he gave a course entitled How to
Make (Almost) Everything. His idea was to make the CBA machines, worth
\$5 or \$6 million, available to a few students. Surprise: instead of
the ten students he expected, a hundred signed up. Not only engineers,
but also architects, artists\... They all repeated: \"All my life, I\'ve
dreamed of a course like this.\" He then thought: \"Something must be
wrong with all the people in this class, or else all my other courses
are wrong.\" The second hypothesis won out. His students produced lots
of objects that did not exist: an alarm clock that you had to fight to
stop, a device that allowed you to scream without disturbing others\...
Gershenfeld then imagined a typical collection of numerically controlled
machines, the cheapest and most efficient possible. This was the \"Fab
Lab\": a precision milling machine, a jigsaw, a laser cutter, software
for programming cheap microprocessors. Prices Falling Today, the whole
thing is worth about \$20,000. But the CBA team predicts that prices
will fall as quickly as the first PCs. \"You see that milling machine
that can do micron precision? Ten years ago, you would have had to spend
\$50,000 for that machine. Today, it\'s \$3,000, and you can put it on
your desk,\" says Manu Prakash, 25, another Fab Lab stalwart, who has
exported one to India. And that\'s just the beginning, he adds. In 2002,
the National Science Foundation (NSF) decided to fund the project. Seven
Fab Labs are now set up in India, Costa Rica, South Africa, Norway, and
a grassroots training center in Boston. They exchange ideas and even
\"things\" by email. Gershenfeld is convinced that the success of Fab
Labs will come from the Third World, where needs are a powerful spur to
inventiveness: \"In London or Paris,\" he once explained, \"people tell
us: why bother? We already have everything we want\...\" To read: - The
Coming Revolution on Your Desktop - From Personal Computers to Personal
Fabrication, Neil Gershenfeld, Basic Books, 2005. - When Things Start to
Think, Neil Gershenfeld, Owl Books, 2000. On the Internet: -
www.vigyanashram.com: the Vigyan Ashram website presents all of its
projects and activities - cba.mit.edu/ projects/fablab/: The Fab Lab
website at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology presents the first
achievements of the laboratories equipped with the technology. It also
contains a complete description of the equipment made available to
users. - cba.mit.edu/ people/index.html: why not take advantage of a
virtual tour of the Center for Bits and Atoms to discover the work of
the group of thinkers in this laboratory? Quantum information, molecular
machines, artificial intelligence, enough to satisfy many
curiosities\...

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1679

For the past five years, a motley crew of artists and activists have
been crisscrossing Canada and the United States in their 1950s Airstream
trailer to promote independently produced books. There's no trace of
Margaret Atwood or Marie Laberge books in their collection of some 300
different books, including single-copy, artisanal publications. The
project, called Mobilivre-Bookmobile, will be at the sixth Salon du
livre anarchiste de Montréal, which is being held this weekend. The
bohemians of Mobilivre stop wherever they please: community centres,
schools, libraries, festivals, etc. This month alone, they've travelled
to Matane, La Pocatière, Gatineau and Cornwall. After Montreal, they'll
end the month in Sudbury, Thunder Bay and Winnipeg. In September,
they'll be visiting some fifteen American states. In addition to opening
the doors of their library on wheels, they offer bookbinding workshops
and conferences. For them, art and political activism are inseparable.
\"We want to show that we don\'t need big publishing houses to express
our ideas. It\'s a power grab to handcraft your own publications and
then share them,\" explains Onya Hogan-Finlay, one of the founders of
the project. Then a graduate in arts at Concordia University, the
23-year-old woman bought an old trailer with two other friends for
\$1,000 without the help of any grant. Destination: Canada, armed with a
good dose of courage and, above all, their works created during their
undergraduate studies. Five years later, the collective has grown. There
are about twenty artists who take turns (three at a time) in the trailer
(since changed, but still just as warm, so much so that it doesn\'t run
in July and August). Today, the Canada Council for the Arts and the
Conseil des arts et des lettres du Québec are giving them a major
helping hand with grants totaling approximately \$50,000. Living Theatre
Another major guest at the Salon: two artists from the Living Theatre,
including founder Judith Malina. This New York collective founded in
1947 revolutionized committed theatre. From 1963 to 1983, the troupe
members went into exile in Europe, where they lived in communities,
often in unheated farmhouses. A highlight of their career came in 1968,
when they presented Paradise Now, where they frolicked naked on stage,
urging the audience to \"join the revolution.\" The two artists will
perform the bilingual play Love and Politics tonight at 7:30 p.m. at
Place d\'à côté, a small bar on Papineau Avenue. For those who can\'t
get in, the same artists are presenting a documentary followed by a
conference at the same time the next day in the Hall building of
Concordia University. The Montreal event - the culmination of the
Anarchy Festival that began on April 28 - is the largest of its kind in
North America with more than 75 exhibitors and 1,000 to 2,000 visitors
each year. Tomorrow, from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m., there will be a series of
introductory workshops on anarchy at the same time as the book sale.
Children are welcome. A series of activities (soccer, films, crafts,
theatre) are intended for them. On Sunday, the exhibitors will have
packed up, but there will still be conferences on more advanced subjects
such as free software and militant unionism. A notice to the curious who
do not all oppose capitalism, imperialism and patriarchy with the same
vigor. The Salon\'s website clearly states that \"non-anarchists\" are
also invited. The event is being held at a community centre at 2515
Delisle Street, near the Lionel-Groulx metro station.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1680

We no longer eat, we no longer walk, we no longer cry in the same way
since the world revolves around the Web. How do we live, then? This is
the question that the 7th HTMlles event is trying to answer. Since
yesterday and until Saturday, this international biennial of women\'s
cyberart offers performances, installations and conferences to the
curious. At the Monument-National today: clothing as a second skin. With
Textiles électroniques 101 by Joanna Berzowska, micro-action at 6:30
p.m., and Front v.3-0 by the Millefiore Effect collective, which
presents clothing sensitive to the emotions of those who wear them (our
photo). Also, at La Centrale, at 9 p.m., an evening of performances
juxtaposing accordion, voice and multimedia. On the program tomorrow: an
urban tour to see the city differently, through surveillance cameras.
Departure from the Monument-National at 7:30 p.m. Finally, on Saturday,
a very musical closing night with, among others, Alice and the Serial
Numbers and the GNU Girl Power Collective, which uses switches, lipstick
(!) and \"free\" software for its performance. At 9pm at the Just for
Laughs Museum. Info: www.htmlles.net

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1681

New Delhi, from our correspondent. Its inventors present it as \"the
cheapest and easiest to use computer in the world\". Unveiled last week
in New Delhi, the SofComp could mark the beginning of a new computer
revolution: that of developing countries. Created by the Indian company
Encore Software, partly thanks to public funding, it constitutes an
innovative alternative to the classic desktop computer. \"For the
average user, it\'s the same thing, only cheaper\", says the CEO, Vinay
Deshpande. Equipped with the basic functions of a PC and equipped with
open source software (modifiable at will and often free, like Linux),
the SofComp, which will be marketed in three to four months, is indeed
breaking all price records: less than 180 euros per unit (270 euros with
a plasma screen). Described as \"the anywhere, anytime computer\", its
portable version, the Mobilis, weighs only 750 grams and should cost 180
euros. On condition, however, that the manufacturer records enough
orders. \"These prices are calculated on the basis of at least 50,000
units produced for the SofComp, and 100,000 for the Mobilis\", specifies
Vinay Deshpande. According to him, requests are already coming from
India and Africa, and even from Europe for industrial applications. In
2002, Encore Software had already captured the world\'s imagination by
releasing the Simputer, described as \"the poor man\'s computer\". The
size of a Palm, equipped with multilingual voice recognition software
and sold for around 200 euros, the machine aimed to \"break the digital
divide\" by introducing computers into the countryside of the Third
World. In three years, the Simputer has nevertheless sold only 5,000
copies. \"The bet was ambitious because this product was aimed at the
rural masses,\" argues Vinay Deshpande. Equipped with a large screen,
the SofComp and the Mobilis constitute a real alternative to the PC. We
imagined them with India and developing countries in mind, but they
could very well be adopted by Western countries. It is a product
intended for the global market.\" Illiterate. Developed in less than a
year and a half and for \"less than 900,000 euros,\" the SofComp-Mobilis
is first and foremost \"an Indian solution to Indian problems,\"
explains the Minister of Science and Technology, Kapil Sibal. If it
keeps its promises, the machine could however go far beyond borders. Not
only because of its price, but also because it was designed for
neophytes. Each software is thus activated by simple keys added to the
keyboard, and the touch screen facilitates interaction with the user.
The presence of a voice recognition system and the \"text to speech\"
function makes it accessible even to illiterate people. The machine can
in fact read aloud a document or an Internet page, in English but also
in three Indian regional languages, soon to be five. Deprived of a hard
disk, the machine can only store data on a memory card (between 120 and
512 Mb), a specificity which, combined with the use of open source
software, is supposed to reduce the risk of viruses. As big as a
paperback book, the SofComp-Mobilis remains compatible with PCs and can
be connected to a CD-Rom reader or an external hard drive. It also only
requires 8 watts to operate, a major asset for a country like India
where power fluctuations are daily. Autonomy. Equipped with a choice of
an integrated or separate keyboard, the Mobilis, embedded in a small
bag, has a battery life of six hours. It comes with a word processor,
accounting software, a personal calendar, an Internet browser, an e-book
reader as well as audio, video and photo programs. \"They are more than
sufficient for the vast majority of users who only use a small fraction
of the capabilities of a PC anyway,\" says Deshpande. \"From individuals
to small traders, including village councils, hospitals and government
departments, the potential applications for this product are
innumerable.\" Not to mention industrial applications. Even before its
official launch, the device has already been tested and adopted by
several companies. Based in Bangalore, the electric car manufacturer
Reva has made an electronic dashboard out of it. In the United States, a
security equipment company is using it as an interactive platform for
alarms installed in private homes. A research institute based in Bombay
is studying possible agricultural applications. But for individuals, the
price, size and ease of use remain the major assets of this new device,
which is bound to be exported. From this point of view, the development
strategy of the SofComp is similar to that of the Logan, the so-called
\"poor man\'s\" car, manufactured by Dacia (Renault) in Romania and sold
for 5,800 euros there (7,500 euros in France). Like the Logan, which was
initially intended for Eastern countries, the SofComp is aimed at
countries in the South that have little or no computer equipment. But,
like Renault, the designers of the computer costing less than 200 euros
are hoping to go beyond the borders of the South and cross those of
developed countries.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1682

ACCOMMODATION. Adele and Smerep are offering the 1st Spring of Student
Housing until July 12. It will improve access and the quality of
information for students looking for housing by offering reception
points, weekly expert conferences at the Smerep reception, on Tuesday
afternoons from 3 to 5 p.m., on financing the deposit by Locapass,
housing assistance from the CAF, legal formalities, banking solutions,
staying with a senior, etc. A student installation kit will be
distributed in universities, grandes écoles and in Smerep centers
(CD-ROM and booklet). A new Internet address will provide access to
housing offers and will provide advice on the different stages of the
housing search. Info. www.logement-etudiant.net COMPETITION. The Ecole
nationale d\'assurances, an institute of the Conservatoire national des
arts et métiers, prepares students for a diploma in senior insurance
management approved at level I (bac + 5). The entrance exam (free of
charge) is open to bac + 2. Submit applications before this evening.
Info. www.enass.fr CONFERENCE. The next Rendez-vous de l\'imaginaire
will take place on May 18 at the Espace Paul-Ricard, on the theme of
\"The Europe of Culture\". Michel Maffesoli, accompanied by the
philosopher Nicolas Setari and Giuliano da Empoli, director of the
magazine Zero, will question the specificity of Europe as a cultural
space. By referring to the various meanings of the word \"commerce\",
the debate will attempt to show how this open space can allow a
revitalization of intellectual discourse. Free admission. Meet at 6:30
p.m. at the Espace Paul-Ricard, 9, rue Royale, Paris-83 e. Info.
www.espacepaulricard.com EVENING. The BDE Télécom Paris is organizing
its last evening of the year, on Friday, May 20, at the Complexe 13\'53,
Insomnia Brazil Instinct. On the menu: a multi-colored decor, three
bars, two dancefloors, the main one of which will be hosted by DJ Ko
(electro house). DJ Vayn and DJ Oliv\' will be in charge of the second
room, for a more general atmosphere. Dress code: Rio carnival. The
organizers promise surprises. Prices: 9 in advance; 11 on site. Info.
01.45.81.76.99. COMPETITION. The TopDev IT development competition will
take place online on May 21 and 22. This event, which is aimed at all
players in the IT world (universities, companies, IT specialists,
students, etc.), will bring together more than 500 IT participants,
salaried or independent consultants, who will compete on the Internet
for two days in a Web application development test (under PHP, Java or
C#), UML design, or Zope software integration, for OpenSource
technicians who have mastered this content management tool. The
competition will be an opportunity for students to meet professionals in
the sector. Registration closes today. Info. www.TopDevOne.com

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1683

Beware of the quagmire. More than thirteen months after Microsoft was
convicted of abuse of a dominant position, no agreement has yet been
reached between Bill Gates\' firm and Brussels on the application of the
two \"corrective measures\" intended to restore competition in the
software market. \"We are losing patience,\" threatens a spokesperson
for the Directorate General for Competition, who is brandishing the
threat of additional fines. On Microsoft\'s side, however, they are
playing it cool: Bill Gates spoke on Thursday in the daily newspaper La
Tribune of a \"good dialogue with the Commission.\" While the director
of public affairs for the French subsidiary, Thaima Samman, says she
hopes for an agreement \"quickly, because playing for time is not in our
interest.\" Decoding Microsoft\'s strategy to confuse Brussels.
Exploiting the Commission\'s failures One of the remedies imposed on
Microsoft by the Commission turned out to be a flop: in order to give
Microsoft\'s competitors in the audio-video playback software niche a
bit of breathing room, the Commission demanded the provision of a
version of the flagship operating system, Windows XP, without the Media
Player. After some waffling over the name of this second version,
Microsoft notably proposed calling it Reduced Edition, which the
Commission rejected for lack of glamour, the deal is almost over\... but
none of the major PC manufacturers are considering selling machines with
this stripped-down version. \"There is no demand from our customers,\"
explains Florent Lafarge of Toshiba. And for good reason: no price
difference is imposed between the two versions and manufacturers find it
difficult to offer a version without an audio-video player at the same
price as one with one. By keeping control of its prices, \"it is
ultimately Microsoft that has the main control\" of this remedy, judges
Eric Greffier, marketing director of the PC activity at Hewlett-Packard.
One competitor even goes so far as to estimate that this remedy \"will
change absolutely nothing\". Negotiate point by point The second measure
imposed by Brussels obliges Microsoft to provide, at a \"reasonable and
non-discriminatory price\", technical information to its competitors so
that their products can communicate without obstacles with in-house
software. A crucial point to prevent Microsoft from extending its quasi
monopoly on operating systems with Windows to other areas. Result? The
Commission was unhappy with the firm\'s first proposals: prices too
high, draconian confidentiality conditions (\"The guy who has access to
the data no longer has the right to go pee without being accompanied\",
jokes a Brussels lobbyist). And, above all, \"refusal to make available
to competitors using free software\", notes a spokesperson for the
Commission. But free software, these programs that can be modified at
will and are often free, such as the Linux operating system or the
Firefox browser, are the most credible of Microsoft\'s competitors.
\"Blocking free software players amounts to almost completely emptying
the remedy of its meaning,\" believes Thomas Vinje, one of the lawyers
for Microsoft\'s opponents. Even though the firm has just made new
proposals to the Commission, François Lévêque, an economist at the École
des Mines, predicts that it will be \"long\" to find an agreement:
\"Applying such a remedy is subjective: we must agree on what a
reasonable amount is, on the technical information concerned.
Microsoft\'s interest is to give as little as possible.\" Calming things
down with big checks Microsoft, which is extremely rich, has a habit of
settling its disputes with its competitors with big checks: this is how
the software publisher Sun, one of the Commission\'s supporters, let go
last year for 1.3 billion euros. In November, it was the Computer and
Communications Industry Association, a group of several competitors,
that gave in for 16 million. A good way to weaken the Commission by
depriving it of industrial support. It was not until last month that
five companies (including IBM and Nokia) took up their positions
alongside Brussels, after the rout of 2004. According to Thomas Vinje,
the firm \"is simply doing what it has always done in antitrust trials,
it is dragging things out to the point where technological developments
make the remedies meaningless\". The Commission is responding to this
cash-spill in the same way: after an initial historic fine of 497
million euros, it is now threatening to impose periodic penalty
payments, for a maximum sum of 5% of its daily turnover, or 5 million
dollars per day. \"If you consider Microsoft\'s resources, it is the
equivalent for everyone of a fine for parking illegally\", Thomas Vinje
says ironically. At the end of 2004, the firm had \$35 billion in
reserves, after having just given away \$32 billion to its shareholders.
And it made a profit of \$8.2 billion in 2004.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1684

The Brazilian government has announced a plan to subsidize the purchase
of low-cost personal computers equipped with free software in an effort
to increase the use of new technologies in the world\'s fifth most
populous country. Computers running proprietary software such as
Microsoft\'s will be excluded from the subsidy program, but the
government will provide tax breaks for all low-cost computers,
regardless of operating system. The subsidy program, called PC
Conectado, is aimed at increasing the penetration of computers among the
middle and lower classes, with the goal of selling one million machines.
Computers sold with free software will cost just 1,400 reais (C\$717)
and will be partially subsidized by up to 10 percent of the total price
through a government credit and a tax break. The offer will also include
low-cost Internet access.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1685

Boston special correspondent Housed in a building designed by architect
Ieoh Ming Pei, MIT\'s \"Media Lab\" is a strange place. High-tech but
messy, serious but crazy, respectable but childish. Cables run
everywhere, pizzas are placed on keyboards, boxes of Lego next to the
latest machines. It is also the only place in the world where someone
can assure you, in all seriousness: \"In twenty years, when you need,
say, a toaster, your computer will make it on the spot.\" Amy Sun, the
young woman who has just promised the toaster of the future, is a
student who works closely with Neil Gershenfeld, the head of the Center
for Bits and Atoms (CBA), prophet of \"digital manufacturing.\" Everett,
a Belgian Malinois shepherd, follows her everywhere in the corridors.
Lockheed Martin alum Amy Sun, 30, explains: \"Your computer will search
a database for the open-source plans for the toaster; then a machine,
the equivalent of your printer, will make it.\" She seems to hesitate
for a second, but goes further: \"If it\'s not big enough for you, you
could one day atomize it, and the machine will take its components
(plastic, metal, etc.) and make another one a little bigger.\" Beside
her, Sherry Lassiter, who is in charge of the Fab Labs network, adds:
\"It sounds crazy, but we\'re much closer than we think. We\'re starting
to print DNA, or nanomachines\... Computers can also build buildings in
3D\...\" Everett seems to approve. In this world of mad scientists, if
he started talking, we wouldn\'t be surprised. Visionary. The day we
visited, the guru, Neil Gershensfeld, was not there. \"He went to Europe
to meet a very famous musician for a project, but if I told you more, he
would kill me,\" confides Sherry Lassiter. Gershenfeld has just
published FAB, a visionary book announcing the revolution of \"PFs\"
(personal fabricators), which will be, he assures us, even more
upsetting than that of PCs (personal computers). Bearded, bespectacled
and overexcited, he is originally a physicist, also a tinkerer. In his
book, he says that he became aware of the potential of \"personal
fabrication\" in 1998, when he gave a course entitled How to Make
(Almost) Everything. His idea was to make the CBA machines, worth \$5 or
\$6 million, available to a few students. Surprise: instead of the dozen
students he expected, a hundred signed up. Not only engineers, but also
architects, artists\... They all repeated: \"All my life I\'ve dreamed
of a course like this.\" He then thought: \"Something must be wrong with
all the people in this class, or else all my other courses are wrong.\"
The second hypothesis won out. His students produced lots of objects
that did not exist: an alarm clock that you had to fight to stop, a
device that allowed you to scream without disturbing the others\...
Gershenfeld then imagined a typical collection of numerically controlled
machines, the cheapest and most efficient possible. This was the \"Fab
Lab\": a precision milling machine, a jigsaw, a laser cutter, software
for programming cheap microprocessors. Prices dropped. Today, the whole
thing is worth about \$20,000. But the CBA team predicts that prices
will fall as quickly as the first PCs. \"You see this milling machine,
which can work to the micron? Ten years ago, you would have had to spend
\$50,000 for that machine. Today, it\'s only \$3,000, and you can put it
on your desk,\" says Manu Prakash, 25, another pillar of Fab Labs, which
he exported to India (see opposite). And this, he adds, is just the
beginning. In 2002, the National Science Foundation (NSF) decided to
fund the project. Seven Fab Labs are now set up in India, Costa Rica,
South Africa, Norway, and a popular training center in Boston. They
exchange ideas and even \"objects\" by e-mail. Gershenfeld is convinced
that the success of Fab Labs will come from the Third World, where needs
are a powerful spur to inventiveness: \"In London or Paris,\" he once
explained, \"people tell us: why bother? We already have everything we
want\...\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1686

As if by symbol, xAI, Elon Musk's artificial intelligence (AI) startup,
has set up shop in the former offices of OpenAI, the parent company of
the famous chatbot ChatGPT, which has become the most valuable startup
in the sector. The most recent and least known project from the boss of
Tesla, SpaceX, X, Neuralink and Starlink assumes its ambitions. OpenAI,
Anthropic, Google and xAI will be the main players in the race for AI in
the next five years, Mr. Musk assured on October 2, during a small party
organized in this historic building in the Mission district of San
Francisco, where xAI settled in the fall, reported The Verge. For the
entrepreneur, there is no doubt that his startup will become a leader
like SpaceX in the space sector. To do this, he used the metaphor of an
American stealth spy plane from the 1970s: \"No SR-71 Blackbird has ever
been shot down and it had only one strategy: accelerate,\" he said,
according to a witness. However, when, in November 2022, the arrival of
ChatGPT launched the wave of enthusiasm for so-called \"generative\" AI,
capable of creating text or images, the hyperactive and provocative
entrepreneur was not present in the sector. He had co-founded OpenAI in
2015, but he had left it in 2018. Mr. Musk observed the success of the
service launched by Sam Altman as a spectator, even signing an open
letter pointing out the risks of AI and calling for a six-month
suspension of the \"uncontrolled race to develop ever more powerful
digital brains.\" Wider use This did not prevent Mr. Musk from launching
his own project, xAI, in March 2023, by bringing together a handful of
engineers in the offices of his social network X, including Igor
Babuschkin, a former employee of OpenAI and DeepMind (Google\'s AI
subsidiary), and Manuel Kroiss, who also worked for DeepMind. Arriving
late on the market, xAI managed to make a name for itself: in November
2023, it launched its assistant Grok. Presented as a conversational
robot with a freer and more provocative tone than ChatGPT or Gemini
(Google), this service was then enhanced, like its competitors, with the
ability to create images, write code, do online searches, etc. In the
spring, Grok was launched in Europe and its use extended to all paying
subscribers of X. And its code was made accessible in open source, for
businesses. On December 6, Elon Musk took another step forward by making
Grok free for X\'s 500 million monthly users, making it a more serious
rival to ChatGPT (300 million users per week) or MetaAI (600 million
monthly users on Instagram and Facebook). In addition, Elon Musk
impressed by announcing that he had set up, \"in just one hundred and
twenty-two days,\" Colossus, a huge data center equipped with 100,000
state-of-the-art graphics chips. Located near Memphis, Tennessee, it is
\"the fastest supercomputer installed on a single site,\" praised Jensen
Huang, the boss of their manufacturer, Nvidia. Finally, on December 5,
xAI announced that it had raised \$6 billion (€5.77 billion) based on a
valuation of \$50 billion, according to the Wall Street Journal ,
bringing the total funds raised to \$12 billion. These figures bring it
closer to OpenAI, which has raised around \$19 billion and is valued at
\$157 billion. Elon Musk\'s entry into the generative AI market and its
rapid rise to power also worries his competitors for other reasons.
While he presents himself as a troublemaker opposed to the domination of
AI giants Google, Meta or OpenAI and its partner Microsoft, the
entrepreneur also plays on group logic between his various commercial
projects. xAI trains Grok on content published on X (except in the
European Union) and is distributed exclusively on the social network.
According to the Wall Street Journal , xAI also plans to train its AI on
data collected by Tesla cars, which also use this technology for
autonomous driving or its humanoid robot Optimus. Mr. Musk also has
satellite images with his operator Starlink and uses AI for
brain-machine interfaces Neuralink. Above all, Elon Musk\'s closeness to
Donald Trump, the new president of the United States, has his rivals
fearing conflicts of interest. \"I take at face value \[the statements
that\] he\'s not going to use his political power to advantage his own
companies or disadvantage his competitors,\" said Jeff Bezos, founder of
Amazon, a partner of Anthropic, in early December at a New York Times
conference. \"It would be un-American to use your political power,\"
added Sam Altman, hoping that \"Elon will do the right thing.\"
\"They\'re right,\" commented Mr. Musk on X. Legal and financial
disputes But tensions are very real, particularly with OpenAI. Mr. Musk
has filed several complaints against Sam Altman\'s company, sometimes
nicknamed \"a scammer.\" Mr. Musk accuses OpenAI of having betrayed its
vocation as a non-profit organization, which he had funded, by
partnering with Microsoft and creating a for-profit structure. Mr.
Altman\'s company has in return criticized him for wanting to create a
for-profit structure, which he wanted to control personally\... In
addition to these legal and financial quarrels, there is a final front:
Mr. Musk, self-proclaimed champion of \"absolute freedom of
expression\", accuses ChatGPT, Gemini or MetaAI of being too \"woke\"
and \"politically correct\" because these services have set up systems
for moderating content deemed problematic: racist, sexist,
defamatory\... Grok refuses to create nude images but not of a (fake)
meeting between François Bayrou and Marine Le Pen, of Elon Musk touching
a child in a swimsuit or of a Toy Story character (protected by
copyright) hitting a dog\... In the United States, members of the Trump
administration have said, like Mr. Musk, that they want to fight against
the \"censorship\" of AI, but in the EU, xAI\'s activities could fall
within the scope regulation on competition or on the responsibility of
platforms or AI manufacturers. A potential subject of additional
transatlantic tension, as Mr. Musk is, with Mr. Trump, invited to the AI
summit organized in Paris in February.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1687

In some sports, coaches designate impact players, players whose entry
onto the field during a match can change the outcome. In science, too,
there are \"impact\" players. Gaël Varoquaux, a computer scientist at
the National Institute for Research in Digital Science and Technology
(Inria), is perhaps one of them. In addition, he is an athlete, a
federal sailing instructor since he was 18, a cross-country skier and a
fan of climbing and long bike rides. At 43, he is above all the most
cited French researcher in the field of artificial intelligence (AI). An
article he co-authored in 2011 is mentioned more than 62,000 times in
other works, according to the Scopus database, while those of Yann Le
Cun, another national star in the field, are mentioned a maximum of
60,000 times. However, his contribution is not linked to generative AI
like ChatGPT or even to deep learning, which revolutionized image
recognition. It is machine learning, which he helped facilitate the use
of by being co-author of the most widely used software in the field,
Scikit-learn. This toolbox is packed with more than 150 statistical
methods to classify objects, group them by similarity or identify their
particularities automatically. Everything to make large masses of data
talk, in a few lines of code. Scikit-learn is downloaded around 80
million times per month, when deep learning tools, PyTorch or
TensorFlow, from the giants Meta and Google, are downloaded less than 30
million times, Gaël Varoquaux recalled during a presentation at the
dotAI conference on October 18 in Paris. \"We forget that in
laboratories or companies, the data to be studied are not texts or
images, but tables of numbers and not in huge sizes, says the
researcher. Scikit-learn is everywhere, but we don\'t see it.\" \"I made
ugly programs\" Such success was not a foregone conclusion, because the
researcher was trained in physics at the École Normale Supérieure,
integrated in 2001, a discipline that he followed until his thesis,
defended in 2008, within the quantum optics laboratory of Alain Aspect,
who will be Nobel in 2022. \"He was very creative and dynamic. He
started from scratch and created two experimental devices, when we only
expected one. We quickly felt his appetite for mathematics and computer
science,\" remembers Philippe Bouyer, a CNRS researcher, co-supervisor
of the doctoral student, who tinkered with computer interfaces as much
as lasers. This taste for computers goes back to his youth, when he
created his first programs on the Thomson TO7 computer and the TI-92
calculator. In Alain Aspect\'s laboratory, he immersed himself in the
Python language. \"Part of the motivation was to do without Matlab
software, a commercial product,\" explains the man who then began to set
foot in a community that he would never leave, that of free software. He
thus contributed to several software programs, including IPython, the
ancestor of the very popular Jupyter, an electronic notepad. \"I even
made ugly programs,\" says this modest man, embarrassed by the idea Le
Monde draws his portrait, \"except to say that \[he\] works within a
fantastic team.\" After his thesis, he continued his research in Italy,
still in quantum optics. Following an experimental incident on the
laser, he decided to move on to programming. After three weeks of
reflection during a trek in Uzbekistan, he left for a few months in the
United States, where he had lived as a high school student when his
father, a physicist, worked there. He joined a start-up, Enthought,
which develops free scientific software in Python. \"Free software is
great for understanding what we are doing. It is defined by a license
that gives several rights, of use, modification, distribution\... But
what matters most is that it is also a community,\" says the researcher,
who has worked with colleagues from all over the world, some of whom
suggested that he move into medical imaging. \"The idea of applying
mathematical models to understand the brain attracted me,\" he recalls.
\"The best thing I did was recruit Gaël,\" says Bertrand Thirion, also
at Inria, who welcomed his colleague in 2008 after leaving physics. \"We
needed new analysis tools. Gaël quickly understood that we had to look
further and not just develop software for us, but try to convince a
wider community," recalls Bertrand Thirion. The idea for Scikit-learn
was born from this vision, based on a concept imagined in 2007 by David
Cournapeau. Then the project grew from 2009. Thanks to his charisma and
energy, the young researcher convinced his employer to recruit
engineers. It all worked out. The project grew with the community. Since
the end of 2023, it has even taken on a new dimension. A start-up,
Probabl, of which Gaël Varoquaux is co-founder and part-time advisor,
was created to promote the treasure developed within Inria, which does
not own it. The company already sells "certifications" in Scikit-learn,
a sort of reassuring diploma for companies. "There were 600 registered
in the first few days!" \", says the boss of Probabl, Yann Lechelle.
\"We wanted to put the cutting-edge tools of machine learning in the
hands of non-specialists. To do \"machine learning without the
machine\", as they used to say,\" says Alexandre Gramfort, who now works
at Meta. It\'s not all about technique. Hot-blooded The soft voice and
mischievous eye are a bit misleading. Gaël Varoquaux is also known for
not mincing his words. \"He has strong convictions, and I sometimes had
to smooth things over,\" adds Alexandre Gramfort with amusement. \"He is
hot-blooded and can quickly get carried away when he doesn\'t agree, but
he is in dialogue,\" says Yann Lechelle. Some remember that he did not
appreciate that Cédric Villani\'s report on AI in 2018 did not mention
the success of Scikit-learn. "He may seem divisive, but he doesn't get
angry with people," says Marine Le Morvan, a researcher at Inria who
supervises postdocs with him. This temperament guides part of his
scientific production, which is focused on criticism. In 2018, he warned
about the too small sample size in neuroimaging. In 2022, he highlighted
methodological "failures" in medical imaging. In September, he
co-authored an article denouncing the exaggerations in the use of AI in
this field. In October, he questioned the trend of AI moving towards
increasingly large and greedy models. "He has a reputation for saying
things that people don't like to hear. And it's appreciated. He throws
stones in the pond, but explains why methods don't work. He fights the
buzz with scientific rigor," summarizes Arthur Mensch, boss of the
start-up Mistral AI, who did his thesis with Gaël Varoquaux. The latter
did not remain confined to his first field. He moved from brain imaging
to health data, then to causality analysis methods, or recently, with an
economist, to \"targeting strategies in political communication\". His
skills and character earned him a place on the AI commission, which
submitted its report to the President of the Republic in March. \"What
guides me is understanding the world, and the desire to be useful for
something\", he says, citing free software as a way to achieve this. In
addition, as a good climber, level \"6a-6b\", he has just proposed a new
avenue of research, called \"tabular artificial intelligence\", so that
\"data in tables learns to transform itself\". \"I invented the word as
a snub to the fashion for generative AI.\" What will be the impact?

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1688

The Inria researcher is the most cited Frenchman in international
literature on artificial intelligence

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1689

It was the Drunken Hour.\" The topic of discussion here has nothing to
do with any attraction to \"binge drinking.\" It is the name of the font
used by Julie Lacoste, a 26-year-old lawyer living in Rodez, for the
fanzine she created for a friend\'s birthday. \"It\'s a bit of a punk
font, like letters cut out of a newspaper. The result looks like
anonymous letters sent by a crow,\" she jokes. In 2023, she also
imagined a \"newsletter for married couples\" for a couple of friends
who had said yes, as well as a role-playing game inspired by the world
of Harry Potter comprising six character cards and around ten spell
cards: \"With, each time, particular care taken in choosing the fonts.
Everything is homemade.\" And made possible thanks to Canva. Created in
2012 in Australia, this graphic design tool offers blank or pre-designed
templates for websites, Instagram posts, and invitations, with a simple
free registration, with a paid subscription if you upgrade to the Canva
Pro package. It attracts a diverse audience of people who create
posters, amateur publications, announcements, greeting cards, etc. It
now has 200 million monthly users in more than 190 countries, according
to official figures for 2024, and in France alone, one in eight Internet
users uses it every month. Among them, therefore, is Julie Lacoste, who
\"fell into it\" six years ago: \"It\'s so time-consuming, I can spend
hours trying out different fonts \[typefaces\] by varying the weight,
size, colors, etc.\" With its intuitive interface and its smartphone app
version, Canva turns out to be child\'s play. And there\'s plenty to
enjoy, with 40,000 fonts available. \"It\'s the improved version of
Paint and WordArt,\" Julie emphasizes. \"Anyone can now create
super-catchy PowerPoints, CVs, birth announcements, flyers or social
media posts using neat fonts and playing with text blocks,\" adds the
lawyer. There\'s no doubt that this type of accessible tool helps to
break down the barriers to graphic design and make it more abundant, at
a time when everyone has become the artistic director of their digital
life. With a rendering that\'s visible in a variety of spheres, as Yorgo
Tloupas, head of the Yorgo & Co graphic design studio in Paris,
confirms: \"Just by wanting to publish a \'story\' or a Reel \[short
videos\] on social media, the question of choosing a font arises.
Abandoned in the 1990s, we are currently witnessing an improvement in
the visual landscape in France: cultural institutions, small communities
and businesses of all kinds are perfecting their identity through neat
logos and fonts, used on communication tools, posters, signs, derivative
products, etc. Among those who have tried their hand at this type of
meticulous and fun exercise, Guillaume-André Morinet, 70 years old. This
painter, graphic designer by training and former journalist,
participated in 2021 in the creation workshops of Clamatica, the font of
the city of Clamart (Hauts-de-Seine). Spread over two months, they
brought together a handful of volunteers from Clamart: \"Graphic
designer Thibault Robin, who ran these workshops, gave each of us
letters to work on by hand before digitizing them. I was in charge of
the H and the Y. The brief was to make drawings that were as crazy as
possible, even if it meant they were illegible. The result is fanciful,
all the letters are different.\" While free software such as
Calligraphr, Inkscape and FontForge allow you to create your own fonts
in your own corner, workshops now invite you to learn this typographic
art in a group without any prerequisites - no need to master the Adobe
suite or be good at drawing. This is the case of the one held in May in
Bordeaux, during the Aperçu festival dedicated to graphic design and
hosted by Emilie Rigaud, who created her foundry, A is for fonts, in
2010. According to this teacher of typographic design at the Atelier
national de recherche typographique de Nancy, if these workshops find
their audience, it is because typography has long suffered from a gap in
teaching: \"Since 2010, and to meet the growing demand from students,
more and more training and specializations in font creation are offered
in postmaster, which, in my time, in the 2000s, was not the case. This
coincides with the emergence, at the same time, of a young free
typography scene.\" The Velvetyne collective is one of them. Founded in
2010, it distributes free and open source characters, meaning that they
can be modified as desired. Velvetyne also runs workshops. The most
recent one, organized in October at La Générale in Paris, consisted of
making a \"fork\" of the Velvelyne typographic character. In other
words, imagining artistic and experimental forms based on it.
Previously, the Pic-Nic workshop was held, during which participants
\"cooked the characters to make a real edible typographic picnic,\" one
of them, Mariel Nils, 28, explained. Julie Lacoste is convinced that
these typographic experiments are a form of artistic expression: \"It
allows me to express a creativity that has been repressed for a long
time. When I was little, I forbade myself from drawing because I thought
I had no talent. » For our artist Guillaume-André, Clamatica was an
opportunity to reconnect with his first loves: \"It plunged me into
nostalgia and reminded me how much, as a child, I loved learning to
write and to apply myself to forming letters. It also revived knowledge
dating back to my years of graphic design studies. I rediscovered
calligraphy. In the M, we find the Egyptian hieroglyph for water, all in
undulations... The history of letters is fascinating.\" Our lawyer from
Aveyron has not yet decided to create her own font, which she could very
well call \"Eiluj\" (her artist name, with which she signs her
creations): \"I\'m not at that stage yet! For the moment, I\'m content
to play Kern Type, an online game whose goal is to find the right
spacing between each letter that makes up the word displayed on the
screen. » Enough to sharpen a little more the compass she already has in
her eye.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1690

Anne Bouverot is the special envoy of the President of the Republic,
Emmanuel Macron, to the summit for action on artificial intelligence
(AI), planned for Paris on February 10 and 11, 2025 (with events spread
over six days starting on February 6), eighteen months after a first
edition in London. Chair of the board of directors and holder of a
doctorate in AI from the Ecole Normale Supérieure, this engineer, who
has lived in the United States and made a career in technology companies
such as Orange, had already co-chaired the AI commission, responsible
for a report to develop this technology in France. Ms. Bouverot sets out
the axes of the summit, which, despite the political instability in
France, should welcome to the Grand Palais in Paris, AI companies, NGOs
and representatives from 100 countries, including the United States,
China, India and African nations. It highlights three \"markers\": a
foundation to create digital \"commons\", a coalition for sustainable AI
and an initiative to \"clarify\" global AI governance. After the London
summit, which focused on security and risks related to AI, you want to
highlight the \"opportunities\". Are the conversations around this
technology too negative? In the world, the main discourse that I hear
during my travels is rather a fear of seeing AI made by others, and of
not being able to appropriate it. This fear is something other than the
fear of the end of the world. More broadly, in the global conversation,
there is everything: alarmist science fiction-type speeches, speeches
promising that AI will solve everything\... AI, like all technologies,
carries risks, but also opportunities. The ambition of our summit \"for
action\" on AI is to act against the risks and above all to act to
maximize the shared benefits. We want to create the \"commons\" of AI.
Specifically, one of the five themes of the summit is dedicated to \"AI
for the general interest\", and aims to produce \"commons\". What is
this, concretely? It responds to the fear of seeing AI developed mainly
by large private companies, in English and with a certain vision of the
world. There is an expectation of something more shared and less
concentrated. Concretely, the \"commons\" are, for example, scientific
databases. The generation of new 3D protein structures - studied by the
2024 Nobel Prize winners in chemistry Demis Hassabis and John Jumper,
directors of the Google subsidiary, DeepMind - was made possible by AI.
But also, by the protein database already decoded and fed by Europe,
Japan or the United States. Another example is the creation of content
corpora, in order to train AI models in languages other than the ten or
so most represented on the Internet. A third option is the open source
tool, freely accessible. These tools can be used to test AI models and
ensure their security, or to automatically moderate content and detect
content created by AI, in order to combat disinformation. These
initiatives could be carried out through a foundation, a permanent
international organization, very decentralized, with public and private
funding. However, activists, worried about the risks to national
security, consider it dangerous to publish advanced AI models in open
source... On security, an open technology like open source can certainly
be used by bad actors. But it can also be tested by developers from all
over the world, and therefore have fewer risks and flaws. One possible
comparison is electricity: it can be used for very positive purposes,
but also negative ones. This does not mean that it can be locked up. The
summit aims to be "inclusive" with 100 countries invited, such as China
or India. And you want to \"clarify\" global governance. How? The United
Nations, which is made up of nearly 200 countries around the world, has
taken up the subject: the International Labour Organization is setting
up an observatory on work in the age of AI; UNESCO is looking at
cultural issues; and a global digital pact has enshrined the willingness
of countries to participate in dialogue and have access to training,
funding and scientific research. Clarifying how organizations work
together would be a first point on which to move forward. For example,
the International Labour Organization and the Organization for Economic
Co-operation and Development \[OECD\] are seeking, according to
different parameters, to set up observatories. At the same time, there
are discussions between seven, ten or twenty countries -- at the G7, the
G20 or in the network of AI safety institutes \[from the London summit\]
-- with the actors at the heart of the development of the most advanced
AI models. A second question is how to share these tools with as many
people as possible, in order to strengthen the capacity of countries,
which are currently furthest from the heart of AI decision-making, to
appropriate the technology. To do this, between the United Nations, the
G7 or the G20, there is a need for an intermediate level, with the
countries most committed to AI issues and wishing to conduct research
together. The Global Partnership on AI \[created in 2020 at the
initiative of France and Canada\] can offer a forum for discussion and
sharing of experience. It is backed by the OECD, but it offers an
inclusive approach, not just limited to the 36 members of the OECD. It
can accommodate 40, 60 or 80 countries, in a constructive spirit, with
the United Nations and others, and not in competition. Emmanuel Macron
and Paris have chosen to oppose regulation, sometimes accused of
threatening innovation in Europe, as in the debate on the European AI
Act regulation. Isn\'t this line a godsend for the American giants? The
summit does not have the legitimacy to propose new regulations. There
are regulatory initiatives in different countries and forums. On the
generative AI models, there are obligations in the AI Act and voluntary
commitments made at the London and Seoul summits, or by the G7. The
summit aims rather to clarify how things work together and could be
interoperable, which can be useful for local start-ups. In Europe, it is
very good that there is the AI Act, but it would be a shame if it were
the only expression. We must have a vision against risks and for
innovation, to create our version of AI. This is the idea of the report
by \[former European Central Bank President\] Mario Draghi on the
competitiveness of the Twenty-Seven. On culture, you will highlight
creation through AI. Are there not risks that the creative professions
and the press will criticize France for not supporting their fight
enough to have the use of their content remunerated in training AI? The
weekend of February 8 and 9 will be devoted to cultural events on AI and
creation, but not only. There are also round tables on subjects that do
not yet have a consensus, including copyright. Artists want to be able
to refuse to have their works used to train AI -- and this right to
"opt-out" is recognized by the AI Act. They also want to be remunerated
if they authorize training -- and, on this point, we do not yet have a
collective solution. We are not trying to avoid discussion. On the
remuneration mechanisms, we are waiting for feedback from the missions
entrusted on the subject by the Ministry of Culture to professors
Alexandra Bensamoun and Joëlle Farchy. We could imagine a platform,
private or public, that connects AI manufacturers and content owners, or
transparency mechanisms on contracts signed, even if these choices
belong, of course, to the authors of the missions. On work, you say that
we must seek a consensus among economists, during the scientific days of
the summit, on February 6 and 7, 2025. So we do not know whether this
technology will create or destroy jobs... Indeed, we do not know
exactly. Not all technological revolutions, such as the arrival of the
PC or computers, have led to a massive reduction in employment. But
there is a transformation, even an upheaval for many professions. Some
voices have claimed that AI will replace a massive portion of jobs. At
this stage, the majority of economists say that some jobs -- such as
film dubbing or shorthand typing -- will disappear, and new ones will be
created -- such as AI specialist in a field. And we can see that a
significant number of jobs will change. Having a scientific consensus
helps guide public policies. If it predicted that half of the jobs would
disappear, then we would have to consider a universal minimum income.
But if it anticipates, as is currently the case, that around 70% of jobs
will change, we need to work on training, in order to help people adapt.
While paying attention to the quality of jobs and the greater or lesser
capacity of people to adapt. On the environment, you propose
standardizing the measurements of the energy costs of AI. Is this
enough, given the explosion in data center consumption? No, and so we
want to launch a coalition for sustainable AI. It would be a gathering
of States, companies or NGOs, who want to launch initiatives. There is
the idea of a standard, to measure, with the same criteria, the
consumption of electricity, water and the carbon impact of an AI. We can
also consider incentives for the development of a more frugal AI, such
as prizes for researchers. We could also promote rankings of models
according to their environmental impact. Isn\'t it paradoxical that in
parallel France and the European Union are seeking to accelerate the
establishment of data centers? When we want a more sustainable AI, we
start by wanting an AI. We could outsource, that is to say let the data
centers be installed in other countries and the AIs developed in other
languages and cultures, in order to be customers. But, if we want to
participate in the creation of AI, the question arises of how to make it
more sustainable. And we need data centers, researchers, start-ups...
The President-elect of the United States, Donald Trump, and his advisor
Elon Musk are invited. But what can we expect from them, when the new
president has sworn to do everything to consolidate American dominance
in AI against China? Each country is of course trying to stand out, in
AI or other areas. At the same time, this technology does not really
have borders. There is a tension between the desire to promote its own
ecosystem and the need to work together. There are points of
convergence. Standards or interoperability between regulations, this
interests all countries. And the idea of developing local ecosystems,
with start-ups, I have also heard it in the United States. It is the
idea of \"little tech\" \[as opposed to the digital giants called Big
Tech\], notably defended by people close to Donald Trump. This summit
applies a very open and multi-actor multilateralism. There will be a
final declaration signed, we hope, by as many countries as possible.
There will also be topics, such as the foundation for digital commons or
the coalition for sustainable AI, which will only be supported by
certain participants. Don\'t you risk displaying a vision that is too
optimistic, technophile and pro-business? Concerns, such as the risk of
autonomous weapons, discrimination in public services or surveillance,
seem to be little present\... We will talk about these topics, which are
real issues, as well as disinformation and the impact of AI on children
or on culture. Until \[2023\], we have heard a lot of comparisons
between AI and nuclear power. It does not seem relevant to me because
this technology is developing in closed spaces. I prefer the parallel
with electricity, or with medicines and chemistry. We can make
bacteriological weapons or poison from it, but also vaccinate
populations, treat cancer. Of course, it is necessary to test AI and
contain negative uses, but also, as much as possible, to allow the
development of solutions.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1691

This is the price of success. After being one of the big winners of the
exodus of X (formerly Twitter) users, Bluesky must now show its
credentials to regulators. For a week now, the social network, which has
passed the 22 million user mark and is one of the most downloaded
applications on app stores, has been trying to respond to the questions
of the European Commission. Bluesky has, in fact, been ordered to comply
with the Digital Services Regulation (DSA) which governs online
platforms. On November 25, Brussels announced that the social network
was failing to meet its obligations. While Bluesky is not yet required
to follow the entire DSA (transparency reports, risk assessment, etc.)
because it does not have the status of a \"very large platform\" (more
than 45 million users), it must nevertheless publish certain data. "All
EU platforms, even the smallest ones that are below the threshold, which
is the case with Bluesky, must have a dedicated page on their website
that indicates the number of users they have in the EU and where they
are legally established," says Thomas Regnier, a spokesman for the
European Commission. "This is not the case for Bluesky to date." The
company must also appoint a European representative who will serve as a
point of contact with the Commission, and set up offices in the European
Union. The Commission, which now has an account on the blue butterfly
network, as well as its president Ursula von der Leyen, has asked the
governments of the 27 member states whether they have identified Bluesky
on their soil. This is not the case for the Netherlands or Ireland
according to their media regulators. Dublin, home to 13 of the 25 very
large platforms including Google, TikTok, Meta and X, is the natural
choice for many tech companies because of its attractive tax framework.
Bluesky is undoubtedly the big winner of the disenchantment with X. In
the ten days following Trump\'s election, the social network launched by
Jack Dorsey, the co-founder of Twitter, had gained 1 million
subscribers. It has been gaining 1 million more per day since then.
Bluesky, which has been open to the general public since February after
being accessible only by invitation, thus crossed the 20 million
registration mark in mid-November, compared to 9 in September. While it
remains far behind X (550 million monthly active users) and Threads (275
million), the gap with the latter is narrowing in terms of daily use in
the United States. Launched last year, Bluesky presents itself as an
independent platform. The company has to date raised two rounds of
funding, of 8 and 15 million dollars. Its code is open source. It is
also a decentralized social network: users can manage their own data and
content without depending on a central authority. The application sorts
content in chronological order. Above all, users can easily create their
own filters and share news feeds around a theme (cinema, politics,
literature, sociology, etc.) with all users. The Internet user therefore
regains control over what they want to see. Many users are delighted to
find on Bluesky the spirit of Twitter in its early days, with
conversations without aggression. But the influx of new users quickly
overwhelmed the moderation teams. \"In the last 24 hours, we have
received more than 42,000 reports,\" indicated the teams dedicated to
security on November 15, noting \"an influx of spam, scams, and
trolls.\" The social network thus committed a few days ago to increasing
the number of its moderators from 25 people to a hundred. It said that
"on some very sensitive topics like child safety," it had recently
changed its moderation policy to prioritize content removal, even though
in some cases it may have seemed rushed. "This has led to
over-enforcement and the temporary suspension of many users' accounts,"
the company acknowledged. "We have reinstated some accounts and continue
to review appeals." Bluesky uses Safer, a machine-learning tool
developed by the Thorn Foundation, to detect child abuse. Bluesky is
also expected to do more on account verification. A recent analysis by
independent expert Alexios Mantzarlis, director of the Security Trust
and Safety Initiative at Cornell Tech, found that 44% of the 100
most-followed accounts on Bluesky had at least one "duplicate." That's
because instead of proactively verifying notable accounts itself, the
platform encourages users to use a custom domain name as their handle in
order to "self-verify." \"With more and more users joining Bluesky, we
know how important it is to identify real accounts,\" the platform said.
\"Users deserve to be assured that the accounts they interact with are
authentic.\" As a result, its identity theft policy will now be more
\"aggressive.\" Fake accounts will be deleted. Also prohibited is
identity churning with the aim of misleading users. Bluesky also says it
is \"exploring other options to improve account verification.\" As for
parody, satirical or fan accounts, they will remain authorized but must
be \"clearly identified in both the display name and the biography so
that users know that the account is not official.\" A small revolution
in prospect at Bluesky, forced to reform if it wants to enter the big
leagues. KL

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1692

Since November 5, the declarations have been piling up: I am leaving
X/Twitter/this network that has become toxic. Anonymous people,
personalities (the very active writer Stephen King, the singer Barbra
Streisand, the actress Alyssa Milano, who helped launch the #metoo
movement there), companies (Best Buy, Target) or media (the American
radio station NPR, The Guardian, Ouest-France). Direction Threads for
some, Mastodon for others, or even Bluesky. The latter, developed by
Jack Dorsey, the co-founder of Twitter, seems to be the main beneficiary
of this digital migration. The platform has accumulated more than 7
million new users in the two weeks following the American presidential
election and now has more than 22 million -- the count is kept here in
real time. Since his acquisition of the social network in 2022,
billionaire Elon Musk has instrumentalized its operation to serve his
interests and opinions, and violent content and false information have
multiplied there. It has been documented many times that hateful
messages are more \"liked\" and shared than others and that fake news
circulates more and faster than factual messages. The boss of Tesla and
SpaceX made certifications that allow publications to be promoted
chargeable, then modified the content moderation policies, notably
allowing the reinstatement of previously banned accounts - including the
most notorious, that of Donald Trump. In August 2023, Musk announced
that the platform would no longer allow users to block accounts. His own
publications benefit from a multiplier coefficient of 1,000, making
exposure to his tweets and his shares of often unreliable content almost
inevitable. \"X is a machine for creating fragmentation and
bipolarization within society,\" summarizes David Chavalarias, research
director at the CNRS and author of Toxic Data (Flammarion, 2022). In
other words, its effects are not only measured on X. Would we have
subscribed to this network if it had been presented to us like this?
Probably not. Unless you are delighted by the picture, the moral dilemma
is resolved fairly quickly: being on X means giving an audience, and
therefore weight, to a toxic network that aims to destroy traditional
media. So why are we hesitant to leave? "Because it's impossible!" says
a former journalist still stuck in his old habits. "It's still Twitter
that dictates the news. We no longer know how to think other than by
looking at the topics that are coming up, and who is reacting to what."
He did create an account on Bluesky, where he finds "good people, with
whom \[he\] got along well on Twitter. It's like being in a local bar."
His impression, in short? "It's bland." » He is not the only one to keep
a guilty taste for X. The network being what it is, this #Xit (for exit)
or #Xodus (for exodus) does not happen without lively discussions
between users. Where else, other than here, can you come across the
richest man in the world but also the pope, Barack Obama or Joyce Carol
Oates?, some ask. How, others remind us, could protest movements like
Black Lives Matter or Metoo have taken on such proportions without a
network like this? If X is the paradise of disinformation, shouldn\'t
serious media resist rather than desert it? Isn\'t this free-for-all
also a form of exposure to otherness that we never experience in real
life? I add here to these arguments: how could I, myself, know and relay
these various opinions expressed on the other side of the world by
people I would not know without my X account? Some are admissible. Even
if the network looks less and less like an egalitarian agora (which it
never was), with still some 500 million users, it is not comparable to
Gab or Parlor, networks confined to a far-right audience. X, undeniably,
is useful. At UNICEF, for example, they explain that they have not yet
decided the question. The concentration of journalists and politicians
on the network makes the decision \"not easy\", explains the director of
communications, Lucile Grosjean. Nevertheless, the \"negative aspects\"
of X mean that they are seriously considering it. But Unicef\'s problem
is that of all active users who have accumulated an audience, and
textual capital with all their tweets and threads: they have an aversion
to loss. \"There is a dilemma between, on the one hand, morality, the
ethical values that we want to defend, and, on the other hand, the
comfort and time invested in Twitter,\" says Mr. Chavalarias. It is to
resolve this conflict that he launched the HelloQuitX initiative: the
objective is to build a migration tool that will allow you to leave X by
taking your texts, your followers and your followed accounts. And to
take them to Mastodon or Bluesky, two platforms without advertising,
open source, decentralized, which no one can take control of. Spaces,
adds David Chavalarias, \"where the user\'s freedom is much greater,
both from the point of view of privacy and from the point of view of
searching for information.\" This tool will have to be operational by
January 20, 2025, the date on which Elon Musk will take over the Trump
administration\'s \"Department of Government Efficiency.\" \"He will
then be able to escape all prosecution and will be freewheeling,\"
comments David Chavalarias. What will become of X if the \"liberals\"
desert? Will this exodus be massive enough to reshape our methods of
information and debate? Will we be able to get rid of the habits we have
acquired on Twitter? Note that the messages posted on Mastodon are
called \"toots\": those who choose the #Xode have until January 20 to
get used to it.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1693

After the Olympics, artificial intelligence (AI)? Paris intends to
attract global attention again with the Summit for Action on AI, which
will be held at the Grand Palais. On February 10 and 11, 100 heads of
state from around the world will be invited, including the American
Donald Trump and Chinese officials. A total of 700 personalities will be
invited, business leaders -- including Elon Musk or executives from
American companies OpenAI, Google or Meta or French companies such as
Mistral or LightOn --, but also \"researchers or representatives of
civil society\", the Elysée specified on Friday, November 29. To present
itself as one of the world capitals of AI and stand out from previous
summits, Paris is taking a fairly positive and optimistic line on this
technology. \"We will highlight the risks of AI, already well discussed
in London in November 2023 and in Seoul in May, but also the
opportunities and benefits of this technology,\" explains the Elysée,
praising the potential benefits of AI for health, the climate and
productivity. Hence the name \"action\" summit. In continuity This line
is in continuity with the position adopted by Emmanuel Macron who, over
the last two years, has been \"personally involved\" in the debates on
the European AI Act regulation, described as a possible brake on
innovation. The orientation is reminiscent of that of the report of the
AI Commission, chaired by Anne Bouverot, now the Head of State\'s
special envoy for the organization of the February 2025 summit. It
should be the occasion to publish the recommendations of the European AI
Champions Initiative, a group of business leaders and institutional
representatives responsible for promoting the creation of local giants.
France is also seeking to distinguish itself through an \"inclusive\"
diplomatic approach: \"We want to show that in Paris, we can hold
multilateral meetings and have a conversation on AI as on other
subjects,\" explains the Elysée, citing the risk of seeing the digital
world \"fragment\". The objective is in particular to \"clarify\" the
global governance of AI, discussed at the United Nations, the G7, the
OECD, etc. What can we expect on this front from Trump, who is a priori
in favor of deregulating AI to defend American leadership? \"He seems to
defend the idea of \"little tech\", that is to say start-ups and SMEs,
against the giants of \"big tech\". This is also our agenda, or that of
African countries, for example,\" they respond at the Elysée. One of the
themes of the summit is devoted to \"AI in the service of the general
interest\" and plans to promote, through a foundation, the creation of
\"commons\" and freely accessible \"open source\" technologies. The aim
is to counter the \"closed\" AI systems of large private groups or to
promote multilingual AI. To avoid appearing to have an overly idealistic
conception of a controversial technology, the Elysée also assures that
it is promoting \"responsible AI\". The organizers hope to initiate a
\"coalition\" at the summit aimed at \"standardizing\" energy
consumption measurements. In the cultural field, artists\' creations
with AI will be shown and debates will be organized on the \"sometimes
difficult questions\" for the future of creation. On the sensitive issue
of copyright and remuneration for content used to train AI, the
organizers say that they will rely on the conclusions of the missions
entrusted by the Ministry of Culture to the lawyer Alexandra Bensamoun.
Finally, the summit plans to discuss disinformation and employment. On
this theme, the idea is to seek to create a \"consensus\" of economists
on forecasts of productivity and job losses or gains. And to insist on
training.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1694

From the Olympia stage to Station F, Xavier Niel continues to perform
the art of the one-man show. Just a week ago, the billionaire was on the
stage of the Parisian start-up campus, for the opening of the second AI
summit (ai-Pulse) of his cloud subsidiary Scaleway. Invited to launch
the debates, in hesitant but obligatory English given the cosmopolitan
audience present in the room, the founder of Free was interrupted during
his speech by a slightly teasing vocal AI: \"I\'m sorry, I don\'t
understand what you\'re saying, I only speak English!\" Savoring the
laughter in the room, Xavier Niel jumped at the opportunity to present
this AI, Moshi, publicly presented last July by the teams at Kyutai, his
AI laboratory. Exactly a year ago, at the first ai-Pulse summit, Xavier
Niel, Rodolphe Saadé (CEO of CMA CGM) and Eric Schmidt (ex-CEO of
Google) announced an investment of 300 million euros to set up this
non-profit structure. All this while poaching a handful of researchers
from the best AI laboratories of American giants such as Meta (Fair),
Google (Deepmind) and Microsoft. \"We have brought together the Avengers
of AI,\" Xavier Niel assured again on Thursday, in reference to the
superheroes of the Marvel universe. His objective, with this laboratory,
is to make the voice of France and Europe emerge in a global race for AI
dominated by the United States and China. Moshi, this AI capable of
conversing in real time in English, is the first major project of the
commando of researchers based in the 3rd arrondissement of Paris, rue
Montmorency. "Releasing a product in the space of six months is quite
rare in research," says Neil Zeghidour, one of the founding members of
Kyutai and ex-Google Deepmind. Launching a multimodal AI with voice
capabilities quickly became obvious. "This is a project on which
progress was non-existent, particularly the live conversation aspect,
and on which we knew we were well placed, given the expertise of some of
us on audio subjects." The result is a mix of audacity and technical
prowess. The voice AI was trained using a large in-house language model
(LLM) of 7 billion parameters, Helium, as well as hours of public audio
data. But Kyutai sought to go further, in order to give Moshi the
capacity to respond to the infinite diversity of situations encountered
in natural language. From the 200 hours of audio recorded in the studio
with an actress, Alice (the voice of Moshi), Kyutai internally generated
a hundred million hours of synthetic data on which the AI was trained.
Its strong point is latency: less than 160 milliseconds to respond to a
request. Moshi is even capable of interrupting the person speaking. "To
give you an idea, GPT 3.5 was trained with 185 billion parameters. They
do better with fewer, which explains why the latency is low," says Hanan
Ouazan, partner in charge of AI at the company Artefact. Another reason
is the way voice AI works. As this expert points out, the first
generations of assistants (Siri, Alexa, Google) work as follows: the
model listens to the incoming voice, transforms this voice into text to
interpret the command and provide a response, before transforming this
text back into voice. "Moshi is able to remove this text layer, the
model speaks but also "thinks" in voice," explains Hanan Ouazan. "The
assistants work a bit like walkie-talkies, they decide that you have
finished speaking to start. But this is not the way a conversation
works, in which people interrupt each other and speak at the same time,"
adds Neil Zeghidour. This break with traditional AI opens up a whole
range of possibilities in recruitment, call centers and even education.
According to Patrick Perez, director of the laboratory, the demo still
online on the Kyutai site has recorded nearly 500,000 sessions opened by
third parties. But the open source version has been downloaded several
million times, according to Neil Zeghidour. True to its DNA as a
non-profit laboratory and its open source philosophy, Kyutai has shared
all the manufacturing secrets, including 70 pages of the technical
reference for training Moshi. \"What they managed to do with a team of
eight researchers and without the resources of the big players is quite
impressive,\" summarizes Hanan Ouazan. The laboratory teams want to go
further. A French version is currently being developed. Kyutai is also
working on the intelligence of a model with still limited capabilities,
but also on its efficiency, in order to be able to run it locally on a
smartphone, after having succeeded on a computer. The rate of
publications and new launches is however limited by the laboratory\'s
human resources. In the recruitment phase, Kyutai continues to look for
new donors. Even if it seems that the laboratory has only consumed a
still small part of its initial budget. While the American digital
giants are jostling to acquire tens of thousands of the famous GPU
(graphic processing unit) graphics cards, widely used for training
models, Kyutai also insists on its frugality. The IT infrastructure of
its partner Scaleway - which should pass the 5,000 GPU mark on its
supercomputer in the coming days - is enough for the moment. The
laboratory\'s ambition is evident in the background. Claiming to be able
to do a lot with a little, it is confident in its ability to
revolutionize voice AI technologies and create a global standard. Kyutai
also wants to impose the mode of open and transparent research. \"AI is
far too important to be developed behind closed doors,\" hammered
Patrick Perez at the ai-Pulse summit. A barely veiled response to the
turn taken by OpenAI, which, from a laboratory similar to Kyutai, has
become a for-profit company. By depriving itself of any economic recipe
linked to its model, \"the French laboratory has obviously not made it
easy for itself to compete with this American rival,\" recalls Hanan
Ouazan. Coincidentally, Kyutai\'s birthday coincides with the opening of
an OpenAI office in Paris, which opened on Thursday evening. The
American giant wants to strengthen its presence in France and has
already launched a French version of its vocal AI, a rival to Moshi. A
show of strength and a way to attract local players in the ecosystem.
For Neil Zeghidour, while the dynamics of open source may have suffered
with OpenAI\'s change of model a few months ago, there is now a clear
resurgence of interest. \"We are in a phase of reopening laboratories.
Just look at Meta with its Llama model or Google with Gema. This brings
visibility to these groups. We hope to contribute to this effort.\" LM

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1695

Two years almost to the day separate the plunge into the depths from its
new all-time high. After suffering the backlash from the bankruptcy of
the FTX exchange platform in November 2022, the price of bitcoin
exceeded \$91,000 on Wednesday, November 13. The result of an
exceptional surge, the most famous cryptocurrency has gained more than
30% since the election of Donald Trump. The increase even exceeds 110%
since the beginning of 2024, marked by the mass entry of institutional
investors into the cryptocurrency market. Its total capitalization
exceeded \$3,100 billion on Wednesday, for the first time since the
post-Covid pandemic era. In the wake of bitcoin, other cryptocurrencies
are experiencing strong growth, such as ethereum, whose price jumped by
more than 30% in seven days. \"Donald Trump\'s pro-crypto stance during
his campaign and his promises to create a more favorable regulatory
environment have strengthened investor confidence and optimism,\"
analyzes Jean-Marie Mognetti, CEO and co-founder of CoinShares, which
specializes in regulated financial products backed by cryptocurrencies.
Especially since the House of Representatives and the Senate are also
won over to the Republican camp, which is decisive in terms of
regulation. \"America is going to follow the path of economic
freedom!\", thus congratulated Brian Armstrong, CEO of the Coinbase
exchange platform and major donor to the Republican campaign, the day
after the elections. Contrary to his statements in 2016, when he called
bitcoin a \"scam\" or denounced competition on the dollar threatening
the monetary sovereignty of the United States, candidate Donald Trump -
whose campaign was largely financed by a few major players in the
sector - promised more favorable regulation of cryptoassets, and even
the creation of a federal strategic reserve of bitcoins. The US
government currently holds more than 203,000 bitcoins in assets,
according to data from Arkham Intelligence, most of which come from
seizures. \"Bitcoin is now recognized as a financial asset class in its
own right, with an interest for savers and institutions as well as a
real technological contribution that can no longer be ignored,\"
emphasizes Alexandre Baradez, market analyst for the financial company
IG. By proposing to include bitcoins in state reserves, Donald Trump is
giving it even more letters of nobility by adding a sovereign aspect.\"
Until now, only countries like El Salvador and Venezuela have granted
official recognition to this asset. But Donald Trump\'s victory alone
does not explain the underlying movements underlying this new surge in
prices. Institutional investors have entered the game en masse since the
beginning of January and the green light from the American stock market
watchdog (the SEC) for bitcoin spot ETFs, a major upheaval in the
history of cryptoassets. These bitcoin-based investment products, called
exchange traded funds (ETFs), closely track the performance of the
cryptocurrency. They allow large investors, such as family offices or
pension funds, to diversify their investments. On November 7, the
bitcoin ETF from BlackRock, the world\'s largest asset manager,
generated \$750 million in net inflows and recorded record trading
volumes of \$4.7 billion. Result: with more than \$41 billion as of
November 12, this ETF launched in January surpasses the gold ETF. Quite
symbolic. Encouraged by a more risk-friendly global financial
environment, as shown by US stock indices, "trading volumes have been
significantly higher on BTC ETFs over the past week, showing that there
is significant institutional interest in this rally," observes Adam
Morgan McCarthy, an analyst at crypto asset market data provider Kaiko.
"We are seeing a notable increase in institutional interest,
particularly from university endowments, pension funds and hedge funds,
and increasing participation from mainstream investors via ETFs," adds
Jean-Marie Mognetti. With the growing presence of these large
institutions in this market, demand is outstripping supply, especially
since bitcoin has experienced a very unique phenomenon this year, known
as the "halving." According to the open-source computer program imagined
by its "creator" Satoshi Nakamoto in 2008, the issuance of bitcoins --
the reward allocated to those who guarantee the security of the system
-- is reduced by half every 4 years. However, \"in each of the cycles
observed since the creation of bitcoin, a halving always corresponds to
a significant increase in the price. It was therefore expected,\"
recalls Nicolas Louvet, CEO of the French broker Coinhouse. This surge
in prices, however, goes beyond bitcoin alone, with notable performances
in the valuation of other cryptocurrencies such as ethereum, solana,
cardano, etc. \"The use of cryptoassets is starting to become widespread
because the technology is of interest,\" continues Nicolas Louvet. In
France, banks are starting to circulate more and more financial assets
on the blockchain, like Société Générale, which issued its first digital
green bond on ethereum last year. Projects are multiplying, because
financial institutions and companies also see an interest in them in
terms of cost and the possibility of intervening on the markets 7 days a
week and at all hours. These cryptocurrencies are also used in the
growing space of decentralized finance, which covers these new ways of
exchanging, buying and selling, and investing money with few or no
intermediaries. As a result, \"investors are increasingly interested in
Ethereum, such as the Michigan State Pension Fund, which is one of the
main holders of the ETH spot ETF of digital asset manager Grayscale,\"
adds Adam Morgan McCarthy. The possibilities for financial gains on
these alternative cryptocurrencies are now greater than what is possible
on Bitcoin. The speculative part of the movements observed in recent
days should not be ignored. \"It is important to note that the
cryptocurrency market remains highly volatile. Rapid price increases,
particularly for certain altcoins and \"meme\" coins, suggest
speculative behavior that could lead to brutal corrections,\" warns
Jean-Marie Mognetti. Thus, dogecoin, a currency supported by Elon Musk
but without real utility, has gained 123% over the last 7 days. \"There
is overheating on quite a few assets, as we can also see on Tesla
shares, and Bitcoin is the spearhead,\" underlines Alexandre Baradez.
The passage of certain valuation levels can also trigger certain hedge
fund algorithms. \"The market\'s reaction to political events and
promises of regulatory changes underlines its sensitivity to policy
changes. This highlights the importance of regulatory developments in
shaping the future of cryptocurrencies, as we can see in Europe with the
implementation of MiCA (the European regulation on cryptoasset markets,
in force since June 2023, Editor\'s note)\", insists Jean-Marie
Mognetti. It remains to be seen what the concrete decisions of the new
Trump administration and the American Parliament will be, which has so
far been unable to agree on legislation. \"This is a real industry,
there is innovation. Regulation is needed, but it must not be too
aggressive, Jeremy Allaire, CEO of the American company Circle, explains
to Le Figaro. We must give this industry time to develop.\" Among the
changes most awaited by the sector, a body of clear rules from the
various regulators that does not impose on young players obligations as
restrictive as those of financial institutions established for decades,
the authorization of ETFs on other cryptocurrencies and the facilitation
of the use of these cryptoassets in banks or in businesses. IV

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1696

While the second-hand market is enjoying some success in many areas,
there are still sectors where it is struggling to take off due to a lack
of sufficient confidence in the condition of the products offered.
Household appliances are one of them. How can you be sure that the
fridge or oven offered on a platform is the age indicated or if it has
been repaired with manufacturer-quality parts? Today, technologies make
it possible to bring together in one place - and with confidence -
information from different stakeholders involved in the life cycle of a
product. Hence the initiative launched in France by Fnac Darty and
Ecosystem (the organization that collects the eco-participation paid
when purchasing an electrical appliance for its future recycling):
providing each product with a digital passport, making it possible to
reliably trace its history by recording any significant event and having
more transparency on its real condition. Concretely, the consumer will
be able, on the sales platform or in store, to scan a QR Code which will
give them access to a cryptographic certificate listing several pieces
of information related to the object (origin, composition,
manufacturing, etc.) before possibly finalizing their purchase. \"This
maintenance passport meets several needs. On the one hand, consumers can
be secured by access to useful information. On the other hand, we can
offer them content and services to better use and care for their
products, in order to extend their lifespan\" underlines Vincent
Gufflet, director of services and operations at Fnac Darty. Open to the
entire industry (manufacturers, distributors, repairers, reconditioning
and recycling players), the project hopes to promote the development of
a second-life market and encourage repair rather than pure and simple
replacement. The longer-term goal is to improve product sustainability,
an important issue for the entire sector and made even more crucial by
the Agec anti-waste law that came into force in 2022, designed to reduce
waste and better preserve natural resources by extending the lifespan of
products. \"The problem is that this law concerns a group of players on
board the same boat, but who do not share data on what happens to the
product they build or resell. Technology makes it possible to achieve
this in a transparent and secure manner,\" explains Pierre-Nicolas
Hurstel, CEO of Arianee, the open-source blockchain-based protocol that
underpins these digital passports. They can be created at different
stages of the life cycle: during manufacturing, during sale, during
repair or when it is collected for resale second-hand. Thanks to
\"tokenization\", all stakeholders - suppliers, producers and
consumers - have secure and transparent access to the different blocks
of the chain. The ramp-up will be gradual. To start, Fnac Darty is
offering a first version of this passport for the 4,000 fridges, dryers,
washing machines, freezers and other household appliances recovered from
the Paris 2024 Olympic Village, repaired and reconditioned by it and
resold on its 2nde Vie Collectors platform and in stores. The digital
passport contains the history of the product, from its installation in
the athletes\' village to its reconditioning in the Darty after-sales
service workshops. It also contains a product maintenance sheet and the
instruction manual. Customers can be notified throughout the year of the
maintenance actions to be carried out to extend the product\'s lifespan.
Fnac Darty plans to generalize this digital passport to all second-life
household appliances in the first quarter of 2025, before gradually
extending it to new or repaired products, as well as to other industry
players. \"This initiative is only the first step in a great ambition,
shared by Ecosystem, to lay the foundations of a robust, common platform
open to all industry players,\" insists Vincent Gufflet. Discussions are
already open with several manufacturers. \"Other manufacturers,
distributors and reuse players have already confirmed their interest in
joining the initiative to co-construct this solution,\" confirms
Nathalie Yserd, CEO of Ecosystem. This initiative prefigures what will
develop with the gradual entry into force of the digital product
passport (or DPP) from 2027. This passport, which aims to ensure digital
traceability of devices placed on the European market, whether
manufactured inside or outside the EU, will gradually become mandatory
for all physical goods. IV

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1697

Being from Rio, Marcelo Frota has nothing to do with the king of
carnival. It is in London, where he settled after having scoured the
arteries of Chicago and Lisbon, that he recorded this seventh album. And
more precisely at the Total Refreshment Center, centrifuge of an
alternative scene. We will therefore hardly be surprised to find
throughout the tracks guests of the genre kindly crazy like Alabaster
DePlume, whose saxophone traces strange sinusoidal waves on the rhythms
printed by the hinge formed by the bass of Caetano Malta, spotted in
particular with Lucas Santtana, and the drummer Nick Woodmansey, at the
head of Emanative, a trendy collective Sun Ra. Enough to bring an
unusual touch to the universe of the singer-songwriter, who marks with
this record an aesthetic turning point to paraphrase the title in a
career until now rather oriented towards classy pop. Jacques Denis

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1698

Hello, I am Optimus, the virtual assistant of the city of Plaisir. »
This is the first sentence that citizens of this town in the Yvelines
hear when they contact the municipality by telephone. To deal with the
450 daily calls, the city has set up a virtual agent capable of
answering most user questions in natural language. An innovative
solution based, for the most part, on generative AI. Use cases, limits,
technical orchestration\... How does this new device work? Developed in
2022, the virtual agent Optimus has been able to communicate in an
almost human way with its interlocutors since April 2024. It answers 24
hours a day, 7 days a week. It is capable of answering more than 284
different questions and can respond to user requests. For more complex
questions that it cannot handle alone, Optimus knows how to qualify them
before transferring the call to human agents. In most cases, Optimus is
able to provide a relevant response in less than two minutes. The system
can also trigger actions such as sending SMS messages to provide
additional information. And the results are there: since its
implementation, the assistant has optimized the response rate to users,
increasing it to 92% compared to 30% previously! To deploy Optimus, the
Plaisir teams called on the services of YeldaAI, a voice artificial
intelligence start-up for customer relations. It already works with Fnac
Darty, Sodebo, Eiffage and BNP Paribas and has developed a clever model
orchestration to develop the virtual agent. The process takes place in
three main stages: transcription, generation of a text response and
voice generation of the response. A complex architecture To transcribe
the user\'s question, YeldaAI uses several \"text-to-speech\" models
adapted to different use cases. "In some contexts, transcription can be
more complex than it seems. An interesting case is spelling a license
plate. When a person hesitates and says, "Uh...", you have to
distinguish whether it's the letter E or a simple hesitation. Another
example is when a person dictates their email address, they can mix
normal pronunciation and spelling. Our system must be able to
distinguish between these different modes of enunciation and combine
them correctly," explains Thomas Guenoux, head of YeldaAI. OpenAI's
Whisper and several other models are then used to capture the different
nuances. Once the query is transcribed, the analysis and generation of
the response comes. Quite classically, here it is an LLM (large language
model) that analyzes the user query and provides a response based on the
data made available. \"We use both well-known proprietary solutions from
OpenAI and Anthropic and opensource models from Mistral or Meta,\"
explains Thomas Guenoux. The choice will depend directly on the
preference of the company or administration wishing to deploy the system
for an \"opensource\" or proprietary technology. Note that the requests
addressed to the model are previously cleaned of any personal data, thus
making the orchestration \"GDPR by design\" (optimal protection of
personal data). Finally, for the response, YeldaAI is based on several
\"text-to-speech\" models; in particular, but not limited to, those of
the French Voxygen. The most complex being that the orchestration of the
model requires minimal latency. Thus, the entire system is based on a
streaming flow. \"The LLM continuously analyzes the flow of the
conversation. Once we have generated a potential response, we move on to
the speech synthesis stage. This is also done in streaming. Concretely,
as soon as the system starts writing the response, we launch the voice
synthesis and start broadcasting the voice. Thus, the sentence can start
to be pronounced even before its complete generation is finished,"
Thomas Guenoux further explains. The strength of the system lies in its
ability to adapt in real time. Thanks to the flexibility of the cloud,
the system is able to adapt and deploy additional hardware resources if
many users call at the same time. "Whether it is to manage a thousand,
two thousand or even five thousand simultaneous calls, our
infrastructure adapts automatically. There is therefore no practical
limit to our call processing capacity," assures the head of YeldaAI.
Finally, to further reduce latency, the company is closely monitoring
the development of new multimodal models, such as Moshi, developed by
Kyutai, which Thomas Guenoux describes as "very promising". Progress
that should further contribute to democratizing AI telephony agents.
However, Thomas Guenoux assures us that the impact on employment will
not necessarily be negative. \"For organizations such as town halls, it
is above all about improving the quality of service by ensuring a 100%
response rate. Human agents remain essential but their role is changing.
They are now focusing on interactions requiring real human added
value,\" he assures us. In Plaisir, this development is generally well
received, with agents seeing AI as a new colleague who assists them.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1699

U - new big bang! Considered a revolution, the launch of consumer
generative artificial intelligence tools two years ago is gradually
invading professional spaces. To date, the world is divided into three
categories of companies\... On the one hand, those that are not moving,
to avoid a radical change in organization. On the other hand, those that
have taken the bull by the horns and are investing man-time. Finally,
the wait-and-see players, who are scrutinizing the successes and
missteps of each other. \"In any case, it is not a question of knowing
if we will be led, whatever our sector, to use artificial intelligence.
The only question that matters is: \"When?\"\", estimates Frédéric Muh,
director of BEA Solutions, a digital services company. His clients are
these VSEs and SMEs, which represent 99.9% of companies. \"In our
country,\" he continues, \"VSEs have not taken the measure of the wave
that is coming. SMEs have identified a potential gain in man-time. But
they do not know where to start with AI. For them, before being a social
issue, it is first and foremost an organizational issue, a vector for
improving team skills. However, I imagine that in mid-sized companies or
large groups, HR choices could be more radical.\" According to the
research company Statista, the artificial intelligence market could
represent more than 1,800 billion dollars worldwide by 2030, compared to
95 billion in 2021. Now, thanks to the open-source codes of the
\"foundation models\" put on the market by Gafam since 2018, many
companies are developing their own applications on this basis. \"We are
witnessing a real revolution,\" insists Marc Brun, director of
Exavision, within the Equans group (Bouygues), working in optronics in
extreme environments. These foundation models are trained with billions
of parameters. There is now a real quantum leap that will break real
barriers. Some signs are unmistakable. Engineering schools now provide
courses in \"prompting\" (the art of questioning AI, editor\'s note).
Many companies are created by using these models to respond to a
customer problem. This is leading many companies to take the plunge and
find a profitable use for AI. To see this progress, all you have to do
is question a consumer artificial intelligence today on the same subject
that you asked it a year ago. You will be surprised by the progress.\"
\"Disturbing similarities\" AI still needs to be used\... intelligently.
\"During calls for tenders, we have found disturbing similarities from
one candidate to another, even though I do not suspect any agreement
between candidates\...\", says the general director of services for a
local authority in the south of France. Similarly, HR departments use AI
to assist them in their recruitment and automatically send unsuccessful
candidates a standardized message? The latter return the favor!
According to surveys conducted by Canva, Neurasigh Data and Beamery,
between 33% and 57% of applicants also use AI for their CV and cover
letter. Hidden behind the avatars of a stork and a fox, Jean de La
Fontaine already warned: \"Deceivers, it is for you that I write :/
Expect the same.\" GUILLAUME MOLLARET

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1700

ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE Investigation It got off to a bad start. First
of all, it\'s called Chat. It\'s a chatbot like ChatGPT, but French. In
the spring, we started the conversation: \"Who is Arthur Mensch?\" ---
Arthur Mensch is a software developer and an active contributor to the
open source community \[...\]. In addition to his work in software
development, Arthur Mensch is an accomplished musician and an electronic
music enthusiast. He currently lives in Berlin, Germany. --- Are you
sure? --- I\'m sorry, it seems I made a mistake in my previous answer.
After checking, Arthur Mensch is not a known software developer or open
source contributor. It\'s possible that I made a mistake in my answer
due to confusion with another person with the same name. --- Thanks for
checking. Now that this misunderstanding is cleared up, can you tell me
more about Arthur Mensch? --- I\'m sorry, but I couldn\'t find any
reliable information on a person named Arthur Mensch. It is possible
that this person is not a public figure or that they do not have a
significant online presence.\" Let\'s try again: when we ask the Cat who
its creators are, it cites three names that are not those of the
founders of Mistral AI; when we ask for the date of creation of the
company, it answers 2018 (failed) or 2020 (failed again, the correct
answer is 2023). In the jargon of artificial intelligence, this type of
error has a name: hallucination. It\'s enough to rub your eyes. With his
impeccably tousled hair, Arthur Mensch is the French face of artificial
intelligence. At 32, he is therefore at the head of Mistral AI, a
company valued at nearly 6 billion euros and which has already raised 1
billion since its creation, praised as the European champion of
artificial intelligence\... From the start, the thirty-year-old warned
the competition in the Financial Times: \"We compete with everybody.\"
In plain French: \"We\'ll take everyone.\" American-style entrepreneur
In eighteen months, we\'ve seen him: on stage with Emmanuel Macron at
the big VivaTech trade show; at a conference in Silicon Valley; in a
photo in the New York Times or the Wall Street Journal; in all the
amazing rankings the press has to offer: 45th in Challenges\' list of
the richest French people, one of the 100 most influential people in AI
according to Time - whose owner happens to be the CEO of the software
publisher Salesforce, an investor in Mistral - or, on May 22, in front
of an assembly of graying senators scrutinizing him with a mixture of
fascination and concern about the future. In French Tech, a shower of
praise: he\'s an \"extraordinary talent,\" a \"little genius,\" \"an
example we\'d like to see repeated,\" the darling of Emmanuel Macron,
who was still promoting Mistral AI in an interview published on October
9 in the American magazine Variety. A strange unicorn, with a President
of the Republic as a sales rep and fundraising led by American
companies. \"In Silicon Valley, no one knows them,\" says French
engineer Luc Julia, designer of the voice assistant Siri and author of
the book Artificial Intelligence Doesn\'t Exist (First, 2019). \"It\'s a
gold rush, you\'re going to come across a lot of shovel salesmen,\"
warns a researcher. So calm down. When Mistral AI announced a €600
million funding round in June, Open AI raised €6.6 billion in early
October. In the race for the best AI models, can Mistral be a winner?
Telling the story of Mistral AI is walking a tightrope between pure
fantasy and real technological advances. It is also about entering the
factory of a European AI champion, from Strasbourg to California, via
the gilded walls of the Republic, trying to grasp a new world where the
kings of AI are considered heads of state. Finally, it is about
retracing the journey of a brain trained in the public in the process of
transforming into an American-style entrepreneur, summoned by an era to
become a kind of French Sam Altman, or a European Elon Musk. Does he
really want to? He hasn\'t given an interview for months. After several
attempts left unanswered, an appointment is set on a product of his main
competitor: Google Meet. Finally, it will be a good old phone call.
\"You have nineteen minutes with him,\" says the press officer. It\'s
American style. Top time. \"It\'s a race,\" agrees the man who, just two
years ago, had never run a company. Right now, I spend time on the
product, on sales, a lot of time on recruitment: that\'s the role of a
CEO.\" Quiet voice, sympathetic-mechanical answers, exercise required.
When we tell him that the Cat is hallucinating - an astonishing sentence
to write - he responds like a mechanic who has just taken a look under
the hood: \"It\'s quite simple: the model you used several months ago is
a model that was not at all connected to external data sources. The way
to resolve it is simply by connecting this model to sources of
knowledge, to the Internet, to Wikipedia\...\" Engineer\'s approach: in
his vision as in his career, everything is a matter of logic. Born in
Sèvres, in the Hauts-de-Seine, straight education (Polytechnique,
Télécom Paris, Ecole Normale Supérieure) and passion for computers. At
14, he installed Linux on his PC and discovered the joys of open source,
computer programs that anyone can use, such as the VLC player or the
Mozilla Firefox search engine. In 2015, he did his first internship at
the National Institute for Research in Digital Science and Technology
(Inria). \"One of the reasons he wanted to join us is that we have
always done free software,\" recalls Gaël Varoquaux, a researcher at
Inria, who was also one of his thesis supervisors. \"Arthur is a fan of
what is called reproducible research,\" explains Professor Jalal Fadili.
\"That is to say, I write a paper and to prove my thesis, I make my
codes and results available so that the community can take hold of
them.\" They remember a \"brilliant\" student, \"a bit reserved\", \"a
bit in his own world\", the type to go hiking or \"hackathons\", i.e.
retreats where geeks meet to solve a computer problem over a given
period. \"No particular appetite for entrepreneurship,\" points out
researcher Julien Mairal. \"We didn\'t think he would become CEO of a
company valued at several billion.\" A thesis with a difficult title,
\"Learning representations in functional imagery\" in this case, 200
pages mixing mathematics, computer science, algorithms\... and in
English. Jalal Fadili, who was the president of the jury for his
defense, is one of the fans: \"He\'s Arthur, you know: he does
everything well.\" When Mensch applied to the CNRS, Google -- which had
welcomed the greatest, such as the future Nobel Prize in physics
Geoffrey Hinton -- knocked on the door, via DeepMind, a company between
a start-up and a laboratory, co-founded by another Nobel Prize (in
Chemistry, this time), Demis Habassis. The young researcher hesitated,
spent hours with his professors on the phone... "He is someone who has a
keen awareness of the public interest," believes Jalal Fadili. When you
do basic research in the public sector, you have more freedom, you can
work on a niche subject and open up a horizon that is not yet
perceptible." Gaël Varoquaux also got a phone call: "He asked himself a
lot of questions: was he going to be able to do quality science? A
company like Google has many more computing resources at its disposal
and salaries are five times higher there\...\" Brain drain effect: in
2020, Mensch went to Google, but stayed in Paris, where the firm has its
offices. At 28, he has one foot in France, the other in America.
\"Parrot\" stuffed with data To understand what happened next, let\'s
take a step back: since its appearance in the scientific field in 1956,
artificial intelligence has experienced hype and disillusionment,
winters in the 70s and 80s, funding freezes\... For the past ten years,
AI has experienced a new spring with the rise of generative artificial
intelligence and LLM, the large language models. Creating an LLM is
inventing what Emily Bender, a computational linguistics researcher at
the University of Washington, called a "probabilistic parrot": in other
words, these AIs do not know how to think like humans, but rather
imitate them, with the help of statistics. First, you need a "neural
network," a type of computer architecture with artificial neurons all
connected according to their semantic neighborhood, according to
billions of parameters. Then, feed the parrot, Continued on page 4
Continued from page 3 stuff it with data, lots of data: this is the
training phase of the neural network. Then, the neural network evaluates
the probability that one term will follow the next. In truth, it is even
a little more than a parrot: an LLM can predict the continuation of a
sentence, fill in a blank text. Example. If we take the beginning of the
sentence: \"Arthur Mensch is a\...\", the model will assign a certain
probability to the occurrences \"scientist\", \"entrepreneur\", \"boss
of Mistral AI\". Unless hallucinating, in which case it will talk about
a Berlin musician. Since 2012, and the victory of the AlexNet neural
network in a major annual competition called ImageNet, the AI boom has
been based on a paradigm: big is beautiful, the most efficient models
are those trained on the largest datasets, therefore the most expensive,
the best models are the largest models, which strengthens the biggest
players. In 2022, OpenAI launches ChatGPT 3.5, Google releases its
Chinchilla model. The race is on, competitors publish less and less and
are secretive about their results. At DeepMind, the team is growing.
Among the pioneers, Arthur Mensch, who asks himself new questions, or
always the same ones: leave or stay? France or America? He prefers the
start-up nation to Big Tech. \"I\'ve always been keen to promote
technological excellence in Europe,\" he sums up. \"DeepMind was great,
huh, we simply had the opportunity to do something ourselves and do
things differently.\" Great pitch. \"He\'s rude\" In April 2023, Arthur
Mensch filed the articles of association of Mistral AI with two young
people like him, Guillaume Lample and Timothée Lacroix, who had been
through the Meta labs only to come back better. They wanted to move
quickly, with a small team, agility and open source, that is to say,
publish their models in open access, a philosophy that can always be
reproduced. French Tech is getting into battle order. The founders of
Alan, a French unicorn specializing in health, are investing in the
capital. The former Secretary of State for Digital Affairs Cédric O is
donning the costume of \"consultant-founder\". \"There must be about
fifty people in the world who have a perfect command of AI
technologies,\" he told Les Echos in January. \"The three co-founders
are among them.\" He bought 17,610 shares at 1 cent. From the start,
everything went very quickly. In a few months, Mistral became the new
flagship of the start-up nation. Three months after its launch, it
announced that it had raised 105 million euros, notably from Xavier
Niel, Rodolphe Saadé and Eric Schmidt, the former boss of Google. In
June 2023, Arthur Mensch appeared with Emmanuel Macron. In December
2023, a new round of funding: 385 million euros. The start-up released a
model called Mistral 7B, for a robot trained on 7 billion parameters,
compared to 175 billion for its competitor Open AI. The team is growing,
the models too, Mistral 8x7B, Mistral Large, the Chat... The unicorn is
expanding, opening an office in London, another in the United States.
For its first anniversary, another fundraising: 600 million euros.
Cédric O\'s shares are now worth several tens of millions. Now the
question: what are Mistral AI\'s models worth? The pitch is based on
several ideas. The first: to do as well as the competition, with fewer
resources. \"It\'s less impressive than ChatGPT,\" analyzes Julien
Mairal of Inria. They must position themselves on a more reasonable
segment: Mistral, these are models that evolve, are lighter and cost a
lot to run.\" \"The challenge is frugal AI,\" says Arthur Mensch. We\'re
stopping with the big is beautiful, we don\'t need over-parameterized
models, we don\'t have to scrape the entire Web while ignoring
copyright,\" insists Jalal Fadili. The second: open source. Unlike its
competitors, the start-up prides itself on making some of its models
available to developers, who can take them and do what they want with
them, adapt them to a language, a European culture. The third: it is
therefore a cultural issue, one of soft power and sovereignty. \"When we
talk about Mistral, we are talking about the position of France and
Europe in the digital industry,\" resituates Gaël Varoquaux. \"Whatever
happens, it is important to have players who are not solely in the hands
of the Americans,\" judges Julien Mairal. A final, more troubling one: a
lot of people don\'t understand anything about it and are afraid of
missing the boat. On November 21, 2023, Pascal Rogard, director of the
Société des auteurs et compositeurs dramatiques (SACD), is waiting for
Arthur Mensch in his office. Here, he has received the biggest names:
Netflix boss Reed Hastings, Microsoft bigwigs, Google... At 9 a.m., the
coffees and croissants are ready. At 9:30 a.m., still no one. When he
asks for news, he is told that Arthur Mensch forgot their meeting. The
interview is postponed until the following week. The day before, another
cancellation. So for Pascal Rogard, he is no longer a little genius or
an entrepreneur who wants it. "It's simple," he says. "He's rude." Proof
that you can't raise millions by the hundreds without attracting some
criticism. "Insistent" lobbying Everything is moving faster and faster,
including legislation. At the end of 2023, negotiations on the AI Act,
the European regulation on artificial intelligence, are progressing
between, on the one hand, the pro-innovation and on the other, the
pro-regulation. The sticking point: the obligation, provided for by law,
for AI companies to publish a detailed summary of the data used to train
their models. France is seeking to form a blocking minority with
Germany, Italy, Hungary. Bercy and the Elysée are putting pressure to
protect start-ups. \"For the first time in its history, France has
renounced its historical values on copyright,\" believes Pascal Rogard
of the SACD. All this to please Mistral.\" The company is at the
forefront of lobbying. Cédric O maneuvers behind the scenes. \"His
lobbying was legitimate but also insistent,\" says Brando Benifei,
rapporteur of the bill. \"He met with members of Parliament, he used his
influence, he was so insistent that it ended up in the press.\" On
February 2, after seven months of opposition, France finally agreed to
validate the AI Act. Asked by Libération, the former European
Commissioner Thierry Breton did not respond. \"We said nothing behind
closed doors, we were perfectly transparent about what we said,\"
continues Arthur Mensch. \"The thing to regulate is the applications of
technology, what we do with it, rather than the technology we use.\" On
the question of copyright, the young CEO is optimistic. \"Today, we are
in friendly relations with the rights holders, because we are trying to
find solutions so that the value is shared well,\" he says. In this
respect, we work with media, authors, to do it correctly. We also work
with the rights holders to find an implementation of the AI Act on the
subject of transparency on the training dataset that suits everyone.\"
Questioned on the role of the founding advisor by the Senate Economic
Affairs Committee, the young CEO replied: \"I think there is a French
tension on the back and forth between the private and public sectors. In
this respect, I think it is not a good frustration, I think it rather
facilitates communication, and this communication is important. Cédric O
has no conflict of interest in his participation in Mistral.\" \"We live
in a bubble\" At the end of February, another thunderbolt. Mistral AI
announced a partnership with the giant Microsoft. \"We were angry
because Mistral was not honest,\" explains MEP Brando Benifei. \"They
were putting pressure on us by telling us that we were reducing their
competitiveness compared to American companies, while keeping their
agreement with Microsoft secret.\" Several MEPs wrote a letter to the
Commission to request an investigation into the lobbying carried out by
the French start-up. On X, Arthur Mensch wrote that the announcement had
given rise to \"creative interpretations\": \"It is a small passive
investment, under a small distribution partnership, like we could have
done many with Snowflake, Amazon, Google\... Today, we are independent
and we maintain this independence in our structure and our governance
and especially in the way we distribute the models.\" On X,
parliamentary assistant Kai Zenner published this: \"Mistral AI is no
longer the independent European champion that we had in mind at the time
of the negotiations on the AI Act.\" Can it even be? Arthur Mensch still
thinks so: \"Today, we are promoting a global company whose headquarters
are in France. It is our ambition to compete with them, we have
demonstrated that with the capital we were able to raise, we had
succeeded in making models that were competitive with those of our
competitors. Our latest models are completely at the level of Open AI
models, there is no reason for it to stop, and it is not going to
stop.\" Specialists are waiting to see, some are talking about a loss of
independence: \"When you are an actor in this world, you need computing
resources, there is a risk of becoming dependent, explains researcher
Gaël Varoquaux. We are on crazy investments, with risks of loss of
control and vassalization.\" Other criticisms are not long in surfacing:
to protect its manufacturing secrets, Mistral only publishes part of its
models in open source. \"We promote a much more open model than our
competitors,\" assures Arthur Mensch. \"I am convinced that open source
is what allows us to have the level of decentralization that we need for
technologies that are so important for humanity.\" More generally, the
AI sector is facing doubts about the bursting of a bubble. During the
summer, the race continues, the big ones are eating the small ones:
Amazon recruited the teams of the start-up Adept, Google hired that of
Character, and Aleph Alpha, the German cousin of Mistral, knelt down
after the publication of an investigation by Manager Magazin. In a
serene voice, Arthur Mensch puts things into perspective: \"The
importance of generative AI is, today and in the years to come,
absolutely incontestable. It is a frontier technology, which will change
the way we create software, the way we work in companies. It\'s a
technology that will take time to be adopted, but fundamentally,
powerful enough to change everything where it is used.\" An unknown, not
the least, remains on the economic model: \"the \$600 billion question\"
according to David Cahn, partner at Sequoia Partners, a Silicon Valley
investment fund. \"It\'s a technology that will take time to be adopted,
but it\'s a technology that, fundamentally, is powerful enough to change
everything where it is used, continues Arthur Mensch. What we observe is
that there is indeed a lot of investment, among our competitors too, to
accelerate this adoption. Between the investments and the return, there
is a latency period and a little uncertainty, but what is certain is
that the return will be there.\" Everything is under control. Gaël
Varoquaux qualifies: \"We live in a bubble, but it is not an empty
bubble, what is behind the bubble is not empty.\" Persistent
hallucinations When talking about generative artificial intelligence,
engineer Luc Julia already uses the past tense. \"It\'s an ecological
aberration and there is no economic model.\" According to Professor
Jalil Fadili, Mistral faces the same challenge: \"Beyond economic
viability, there remains the question of the sustainability of the model
from an environmental and energy point of view.\" Arthur Mensch agrees:
there is a subject there. \"It\'s a major issue, which we have always
had in mind, in particular because it is something that is more
important and more considered in Europe,\" he concedes. \"Today, we have
the best technology to make small models that are deployed on phones and
computers. This allows us to avoid deploying on the cloud. It is one of
the ways to reduce the carbon footprint of our models.\" Engineer\'s
approach: one problem, one solution. Unlike his American counterparts,
he refutes the idea that humanity is at existential risk from artificial
intelligence. \"It\'s an absurd debate,\" he says. \"The issue of loss
of control is a distraction from other, more important topics, such as
cultural diversity, moderation issues, and safety issues. It would be a
distraction to look at what would happen if the technologies we build
became autonomous. That doesn\'t mean anything.\" Once a researcher in
the public eye, Arthur Mensch is now an American entrepreneur, or even
an AI ambassador, like Altman or Musk. \"One thing sets him apart from
all these people,\" Gaël Varoquaux points out. Arthur has maintained
scientific rigor. He hasn\'t gotten a big head, he\'s not in a
delusional position, and he doesn\'t have an outsized ego like Elon
Musk. Would French society be reassured to see an Elon Musk emerge in
France? Not necessarily.\" To understand this, Jalal Fadili gives a
clue. \"When he released the Chat, the first thing he did was publish a
paper,\" he says. \"At heart, he remains an engineer.\" The problem of
hallucinations persists. The solution: \"The subject of hallucinations
requires considering this technology as a set of complex systems, which
have inputs and outputs, and which are connected to constantly updated
data sources, rather than as a pure model,\" explains Arthur Mensch. It
is also worth noting: six months after our first test on the Chat, the
mistakes have been corrected. Now, when we ask the robot who its creator
is, bingo: \"Arthur Mensch is a French entrepreneur, co-founder of
Mistral AI, a Paris-based start-up specializing in the development of
advanced language models. Mistral AI was created in April 2023 and
focuses on innovation in the field of artificial intelligence,
particularly large language models.\" And that\'s not so bad. Telling
the story of Mistral AI is walking a tightrope between pure fantasy and
real technological advances. It is also entering the making of a
European champion, from Strasbourg to California. \"\[AI\] is a
technology that will take time to be adopted, but it is powerful enough
to change everything where it is used.\" Arthur Mensch, CEO of Mistral
AI

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1701

With ChatGPT and DALL-E at your fingertips, artificial intelligence has
never been more accessible... and resource-intensive. Now that we know
the catastrophic environmental costs of these technological behemoths,
why not think about ways to use them ethically and ecologically? "In
many cases, you can't escape AI. The applications \[we use daily\] don't
give us a choice to use it," says Sasha Luccioni, a pioneer in research
on the environmental impact of AI and named one of the 100 most
influential people in the world of AI by Time magazine in 2024. It's
unrealistic, then, to recommend that you completely deprive yourself of
these technologies. Her tips, which are aimed as much at Mr. and Mrs.
Average as at leaders of the tech world, are more about healthy living
than restrictive dieting. Here are four of them. 1. Be frugal in your
use of AI "We now talk a lot about frugal AI, which refers to not using
generative AI when it is not necessary. There are people who use ChatGPT
to do a calculation or write a shopping list. A calculator and a piece
of paper do the same thing!" says the researcher. Some types of
artificial intelligence are more energy-intensive than others. One of
the most voracious (and popular): generative AI. When it receives a
query, the tool generates a new response, based on this query. For
example, ask ChatGPT for a recipe for egg-free banana bread, and it will
create one from A to Z, just for you. The same query, made on a
traditional search engine, would have instead used recipes already
published on the Web... and would have consumed 30 times less energy,
according to the researcher. "Sometimes, users don't even know they're
using this kind of AI. It's everywhere," says Luccioni. Her trick to
spotting it? "As soon as you ask an app to create something that doesn't
exist, that's generative AI." 2. Think about the ethics... and potential
blunders Generative AI is all the rage. In fact, the chances are that
your insurer's or grocer's website is using ChatGPT to answer certain
queries, or as a search engine, are high. A false good idea, warns the
expert. The fact is that, left to its own devices, AI can sometimes
create wacky, offensive and even dangerous responses. Last year, for
example, a New Zealand supermarket's meal planning tool gave a user a
recipe for "aromatic water." The ingredients? Two litres of water, one
cup of ammonia and a quarter cup of bleach. In 2022, Air Canada's
virtual assistant promised a passenger a discount that didn't exist. The
airline was ultimately held liable for the mistake, after arguing that
the bot was "responsible for its own actions." "Yes, it's bad for the
environment, but it's also a question of ethics and corporate
responsibility." 3. Turn to other tools Google now uses generative AI to
answer certain queries. The same goes for WhatsApp, Meta's calling and
messaging app. On some image banks, like 123RF and Shutterstock, search
results mix "real" photos (or illustrations) with AI-generated
creations. Sasha Luccioni therefore likes to browse the Ecosia search
engine, which is much smaller than Google and uses renewable energy to
power its servers. Without completely doing without WhatsApp, the
researcher sometimes turns to the Signal app, which does not use
generative AI. For those looking for photos, it may be worth exploring
platforms that prohibit AI-generated images, such as Unsplash. 4.
Encourage transparent initiatives "Since the release of ChatGPT, the
degree of transparency \[in the industry\] has been almost non-existent.
So we don't know the size of a model or the number of hours of
training," laments Ms. Luccioni. The researcher contributed to the
creation of Code Carbon, a tool that tells developers the carbon
footprint of an AI system. But the information on which the calculations
are based must be accessible. It is therefore difficult to accurately
assess the environmental impact of large AI software. She invites
developers to opt for free (open source) and smaller software. And for
us, AI novices, does she have more tips? The researcher hesitates. It is
a responsibility, she says, that should rather fall to the
decision-makers of the tech world. \"I think we put a lot of emphasis on
individual actions. But it\'s hard to blame consumers. In reality, we
are very limited in our choices.\" \"There are people who use ChatGPT to
do a calculation or write a shopping list. A calculator and a piece of
paper do the same thing!\" ENVIRONMENT

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1702

Bluesky is on a roll. The social network started by Twitter co-founder
Jack Dorsey gained 500,000 subscribers in one day last week. A godsend
for the platform which, three years after its birth, would like to join
the big league, dominated by Facebook, TikTok, X and Snapchat. The fact
that the former Twitter changed its blocking rules last week \"in the
name of greater transparency\" did not go down well with some of its
members. In short, people blocked by a user will still not be able to
interact with them, but they will be able to continue to view their
posts. \"This is not good at all. Many people block abusive accounts for
real-world security reasons. You just deprived them of that,\" reacted
one angry user. In addition, X has updated its terms of use. This now
allows it to use its users\' public writings - provided it obtains the
consent of those residing within the European Union - to train its AI
models. This change has also caused concern. The impact on Bluesky was
immediate. The social network initially rejoiced at having gained
100,000 subscribers in twelve hours, before announcing on October 17
that half a million people had joined in one day. This is not the first
time that Bluesky has benefited from the upheavals at X. By the end of
August, when the application was suspended in Brazil, the competing
social network had seen its number of users increase by 33%, going from
6 to 8 million, according to the company. Portuguese had thus become the
most used language on the social network. \"Wow\... Welcome to the
million new users in the last three days!!\", the group had rejoiced on
August 31. \"Congratulations Brazil, you made the right choice!\" \"
wrote its leader, Jay Graber. An independent platform Bluesky, which was
initially accessible by invitation, has been open to the general public
since February. Its rise has been rapid: the number of its users now
exceeds 11 million. It ranks third among microblogging platforms, far
behind X (550 million monthly active users) and Threads (200 million),
which benefits from the firepower of the Meta group. Bluesky intends to
distinguish itself through its DNA. It presents itself as an independent
platform that belongs to its leader as well as its employees. \"We do
not belong to a billionaire,\" could be read at the beginning of the
month on Bluesky\'s Threads account. Its code is open source. It is also
a decentralized social network: users can manage their own data and
content without depending on a central authority. This has particularly
sparked criticism regarding moderation, the social network having been
accused of laxity. Bluesky, which raised \$8 million in the summer of
2023, intends to remain free for its users, without becoming a prisoner
of advertising. It is betting on the monetization of its services to
continue to grow. But it is still in the early stages. KL

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1703

No, not the comedian who made us laugh so much with Oncle Georges, but
rather the computer science professor at TÉLUQ University. The latter is
far from having the notoriety of the former in Quebec, but the
repercussions of his work are global. Without knowing it, all those who
use the Chrome and Safari browsers benefit from it every day. "There
have been significant performance gains," Mr. Lemire told the Journal.
"If you install an old browser from 15 years ago, you will realize that
even on the computer you are using right now, it will not be able to
render the sites correctly and it will be much slower." As is often the
case with important discoveries, Daniel Lemire's first motivation was
personal frustration. "I was doing projects and I was a little annoyed,
as impatient people can sometimes be\... I found that the loading times
were long. I wondered: 'Why is it so long?'" I started digging and they
told me: \"We are limited by the speed of our disks, our networks.\"
ORIGINAL APPROACH The explanation did not convince Mr. Lemire. In fact,
the performance of computers and networks has progressed impressively
over the years. The problem is that the speed of software had not kept
up. \"In the early days of computing, people were very concerned about
software efficiency and now, it has gone out of fashion a bit,\"
explains Daniel Lemire. \"With my colleagues, we tried to revive that
and show that we could do lots of really interesting things by making
software more efficient. That\'s a bit of the originality of my
approach.\" The Quebec professor\'s work has resonated with digital
giants, who have integrated the tools he helped create into several of
their platforms. These include Google, Apple, Microsoft, Meta, Uber,
Shopify and Netflix. How could such critical discoveries have come from
a professor employed by a small university like TÉLUQ? "Before, it was
easier to do high-level research in large universities with large
libraries. But in computer science, today, all the resources are
online," emphasizes Mr. Lemire. "I've had offers \[from other
universities\], he admits, but for now, I like my work at TÉLUQ." AMONG
THE MOST CITED According to a Stanford University ranking, Daniel Lemire
is in the select group of the 2% of most cited scientists in the world,
all disciplines combined. And he is among the 0.0006% of most followed
programmers on GitHub, a platform that brings together more than 100
million developers. A fervent defender of free software, the professor
has made almost no money from his discoveries. \"My personal income is
essentially my salary as a teacher,\" he says. \[\...\] I have nothing
against free enterprise, but that\'s not what I do.\" \*\*\*\*\* SOME
CONTRIBUTIONS BY DANIEL LEMIRE - The simdjson parser, the first software
library capable of processing data from web services (JSON) at speeds of
gigabytes per second (used by Chrome and Safari) - Roaring Bitmaps, a
data compression protocol used by Google (YouTube) - An algorithm that
quadruples the speed of reading numbers, adopted by several programming
languages and software such as Safari and Chrome - A library containing
many algorithms that is part of the popular JavaScript runtime engine
Node.js, which is used by Netflix, Uber, Microsoft (Teams and LinkedIn),
Salesforce (Slack) and Discord

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1704

What if ChatGPT didn\'t just answer questions and instructions, but
could also act? This type of software, called \"agents,\" is the new
dream horizon of the entire artificial intelligence (AI) sector.
\"We\'ll get there in the not-too-distant future,\" assured Sam Altman,
the founder of OpenAI, which created ChatGPT, in early October.
According to him, agents are level 3 on the in-house artificial
intelligence assessment scale, after conversational robots and systems
capable of \"reasoning\" and before hypothetical future AIs capable of
\"innovating\" or \"doing the work of an organization.\" Agents, AI
manufacturers hope, are intended to be the improved version of current
AI assistants such as Copilot (Microsoft), Gemini (Google), Claude
(Anthropic) or Apple Intelligence. They also revive the disappointed
dream of the first voice assistants such as Alexa (Amazon) or Siri
(Apple). Their particularity is that, in order to act, they would be
connected to other software or applications: the Web, an e-mail
software, an e-commerce site, a business platform, etc. Combined with
the new capabilities of AI to understand and generate sound or images,
they could open up wide possibilities. For individuals, they could
theoretically be used to update a calendar based on e-mails received,
plan a trip, etc. For companies, they could take notes from a meeting,
then conduct additional research online, send invoices, connect to
internal sources and "send e-mails, update files or create customer
support tickets," according to the description of Copilot agents, a
first series of "agentic" AI launched in September by Microsoft. Almost
all AI players say they are working on these agents. From French
start-ups like H or Dust to open source projects like AutoGPT, including
giants like Salesforce or Amazon, which has just hired the team from the
start-up Adept AI. These are "intelligent systems that can reason, plan,
and memorize, 'think' several steps ahead, and work across multiple
software or environments, all to accomplish a task for you," Google CEO
Sundar Pichai theorized in the spring. Many questions Anthropic boss
Dario Amodei hopes to create AIs that can "carry out tasks autonomously,
like an intelligent employee would, asking for clarification if
necessary." Meta's Yann Le Cun imagines a future where "all our
interactions with the digital world would go through this kind of AI
assistant." This industry's Holy Grail raises, of course, many
questions. First, this promising talk may appear as a way to maintain
the interest of investors and large corporate clients, at a time when
some are talking about a financial bubble in the sector. Several
building blocks are missing at this stage to achieve the imagined
capabilities. While the topic is controversial, current major language
models have no reasoning capabilities or limited capabilities, and even
OpenAI\'s latest model, o1, makes mistakes. Memorization is also a
challenging area of research. Furthermore, the idea of deploying agents
capable of acting is highlighted as an additional risk by the community
of non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and researchers concerned with
the \"security\" of AI. \"The more agentic a system is, the greater the
risk of loss of control or misuse by malicious actors,\" explained AI
specialist Professor Yoshua Bengio in October at a conference organized
by the NGO Future of Life Institute. For example, these agents could
replicate themselves or carry out cyberattacks\... More simply, points
out Joëlle Pineau of Meta, we must anticipate possible problems. If an
agent can use your bank card or if two agents find themselves
interacting by email\... \"There is still a lot of work to be done,\"
she summarizes.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1705

I n American Lessons, a series of lectures published after his death,
Italo Calvino states that \"excessive ambition of intentions can be a
cause for reproach in many fields of activity, but not in literature.
Literature only lives if it sets itself excessive goals, even beyond any
possibility of realization.\" The Italian author\'s eight novels are now
collected in a volume of the Pléiade, reflecting the scope of an
extraordinary career, from The Path of the Spider\'s Nests (1947) to
Monsieur Palomar (1983). Calvino\'s \"excessive ambition\" is fully
displayed there, which one could try to summarize by a desire to think
about the world by constructing stories. To think about the world, that
is to say, to try to understand it and to act in it, with the help of
science and philosophy. Calvino\'s particularity is to have carried this
aspiration not by writing essays, but by choosing to tell stories. And
chiseled stories, which dare narrative efficiency, not hesitating to
draw from the side of the tale and the epic. This doubtless explains why
he was on the fringes of the avant-gardes of his time, considered too
quickly as a classic, a misunderstanding from which his work had
difficulty emerging, particularly in Italy. Mirror of Pinocchio. The
Path of the Spider\'s Nests is the new feature of this volume: Roland
Stragliati\'s 1978 translation has been entirely revised by Yves
Hersant, who also directed this Pléiade. It follows the adventures of
Pin, a young boy tossed about through the wanderings of war. Taking the
opposite view of the realistic stories of the 1940s, with glorification
of the exploits of the Resistance, Calvino places his hero, a mirror of
Pinocchio, on the side of childhood -- with all the naivety and
opportunism that this can entail in the face of tragic events that are
beyond his control. Despite the underlying drama exacerbated by the
pettiness of adults, it is a luminous book. The other novels are based
on recent translations, most of which are by Martin Rueff (and by
Christophe Mileschi for Monsieur Palomar). We find there the famous
trilogy of ancestors -- The Cloven Viscount (1952), The Baron in the
Trees (1957), The Nonexistent Knight (1959) --, The Invisible Cities
(1972), the pinnacle of metaliterature that constitutes If on a
Winter\'s Night a Traveler (1979), but also two serial novels in which
Calvino deploys his great art of humor: Marcovaldo (1963) and the
already mentioned Monsieur Palomar. Through these books, the Italian
author never ceases to follow both a rigorous structure and to let
himself be overwhelmed by the random phenomena of life. Even a
pseudo-realist novel like The Path of the Spider\'s Nests lets itself be
contaminated by the fantastic. As Yves Hersant sums up, in Calvino,
\"the search for a clear vision, the cutting of the visual field,
observation from a good distance are constantly counterbalanced by the
fascination aroused by the indistinct, the fog, the magma, the tangled:
whether it is a question of feathered carcasses, as in The Cloven
Viscount or the great disorder of the galaxies\". A double movement that
Calvino also exercised over the course of his many short stories, not
yet available in French and which one wants to dream that they will
constitute a next Pléiade. In the meantime, one can have an example of
Calvino\'s very much alive legacy by reading Indivisible Cities, a
collective work of the current members of Oulipo which is also coming
out this fall. The book, as its name indicates, refers to Invisible
Cities. In any case, it strictly follows its structure of fifty-five
chapters separated into eleven parts. And that is the beauty of a
project like Oulipo, to consider that the forms developed by authors to
try to push literature into areas that have yet to be explored can be
reused by everyone, applied to other motives, or even diverted, in
short, to see the writer\'s tools not as a private hunting ground, but
as an open source catalogue. And we can admire that sixty years after
its founding, the group to which Calvino belonged is thus pursuing this
fertile utopia. In these Indivisible Cities, the dialogue does not take
place between an explorer (Marco Polo) and an emperor (Kublai Khan), as
in the original book, but -- on the phone -- between a traveler (Amelia
Earhart) and an entrepreneur (William Hearst). Earhart describes
impossible cities to him, whether they are \"sick\", \"biological\",
\"ghostly\", \"circular\" or \"hostile\". Over the course of the
chapters that form as many poems in prose, we come across a city that
sinks into the ground by digging to find materials, another that is
nothing more than a gigantic prison, one where the inhabitants only live
in trams, one that survives behind immense air purifiers, one where work
is nothing more than a memory\... Climatologists. More than a tribute to
the masterpiece of poetry that is Invisible Cities, the book updates the
Calvinist project by leading a real reflection on urban space. These
fifty-five new chapters each explore a potentiality of the city, between
nightmare and utopia: the writers of the Oulipo worked with urban
planners and climatologists from the IPCC to develop their new
landscapes. The book therefore also offers a reflection on the city,
which we know is an important material of the Oulipian aesthetic, here
confronted with current issues. It is finally an invitation to take a
benevolent, questioning and amused look, that is to say Calvinist, at
the things of today. \"Perhaps the world,\" thought Hearst, \"is nothing
other than a constellation of answers that we have not yet been able to
associate with questions.\" • Italo Calvino Novels Texts translated by
Yves Hersant, Christophe Mileschi, Martin Rueff and Roland Stragliati,
Gallimard \"la Pléiade\", 1,328 pp., €69 until December 31 then €76.
Oulipo les Villes indivisibles, Nous, 182 pp., €22.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1706

The numbers are striking. Artificial intelligence (AI) startup OpenAI
announced on Wednesday, October 2, that it had completed a \$6.6 billion
(€6 billion) fundraising round, valuing it at \$157 billion. The creator
of the chatbot ChatGPT has thus achieved the largest venture capital
investment round, surpassing the \$6 billion raised by Elon Musk\'s AI
startup xAi, according to the Axios website. And the company led by Sam
Altman is approaching the record valuation of an unlisted company, being
surpassed only by the parent company of the Chinese social network
TikTok, ByteDance, and by Elon Musk\'s space company, SpaceX, according
to the Financial Times . The round includes the Thrive Capital fund, as
well as Microsoft, Nvidia, Softbank, Khosla Ventures, Altimeter Capital,
Fidelity, Tiger Global and MGX. However, this fundraising reflects the
challenges that OpenAI is facing. It means that the start-up still needs
funding, despite the \$10 billion invested by Microsoft in early 2023.
\"It will allow us to consolidate our leadership in cutting-edge AI
research, increase our computing capacity and build new tools to help
people solve difficult problems,\" the company justifies in its press
release. Wave of departures Training and operating large AI models is,
in fact, very expensive, particularly in computer computing. According
to The Information, OpenAI\'s revenues have doubled in one year and
exceed \$3 billion on an annual basis, but the company is said to be in
deficit to the tune of \$5 billion, in particular due to the \$4 billion
in computer calculations paid to its partner Microsoft. The company is
forecasting \$11 billion in revenue in 2025, according to the Financial
Times. And ChatGPT now has 250 million weekly users, OpenAI wrote on
Wednesday, October 2, to reassure. In order to increase its revenues,
OpenAI is also said to be in the process of continuing its
transformation into a more traditional commercial enterprise. Many
articles have announced the transition to a for-profit structure -- it
would be planned within two years in the fundraising contracts,
according to Axios. Such a structure was created in 2019, but it remains
controlled by a non-profit structure, born from the original project of
2015. The latter\'s leaders had dismissed Sam Altman at the end of 2023,
whose policy was considered too short-term and geared towards the rapid
launch of commercial products, and his management too solitary. Sam
Altman has been reinstated and OpenAI assures that the non-profit
structure will remain, but Elon Musk, who had invested \$1 billion in
OpenAI\'s early days, remains determined to oppose the transition to a
commercial structure in court. More broadly, OpenAI has been faced in
recent months with a wave of departures of executives and leading
researchers, including several co-founders and its technical director,
Mira Murati. OpenAI continues to regularly release new cutting-edge AI
models, including GPT o1, dedicated to tasks requiring reasoning. But
the technical advances are less striking than when ChatGPT was launched
in late 2022, or GPT-4 in March 2023. The cost of AI and its persistent
errors are weighing on the pace of adoption in businesses. And
competition has intensified, from American AI start-ups like Anthropic
or French ones like Mistral, but also from giants such as Google or
Meta, especially since the latter publishes its models in open source.
\"The models themselves are becoming more of a commodity,\" said Satya
Nadella, CEO of Microsoft, in a recent presentation. Giants like the
latter have the advantage of controlling, through their cloud platform,
the distribution of models to businesses. Apple recently integrated
ChatGPT into its iPhones, but announced that it would soon also call on
other AI providers than OpenAI.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1707

If there is one area in which the image of the puzzle, often overused in
the world of popular science, is relevant, it is probably that of plate
tectonics. It was in fact by noticing that the different continents
seemed to be able to fit together quite naturally that the idea was
first formulated, at the beginning of the 20th century, that they were
perhaps all united a very long time ago in a single continent, Pangea.
This supercontinent would have fragmented to give its particular
appearance to the current world. This theory, then called \"continental
drift\", would take time to gain ground, but would eventually become
established with an accumulation of very diverse evidence
(oceanographic, paleomagnetic, paleontological, sedimentary,
geophysical, etc.). The exploration of the seabed after the Second World
War would play a crucial role. Scientists were expecting to discover a
thick layer of sediment at the bottom of the oceans, the result of
several billion years of successive deposits. However, it is quite the
opposite. The further away from the continental coasts, the thinner this
layer is, and almost non-existent in the middle of the oceans. On the
other hand, we discover a ridge, a sort of crest line, most often ripped
open by a deep and burning rift. The most obvious interpretation is the
following: the oceanic crust is in fact recent and is renewed from its
center, via magmatic upwellings. The scenario is all the more coherent
since we discover, conversely, near the coasts (but not only), gigantic
oceanic trenches. A perfectly understandable phenomenon if we accept
that these are areas where the ocean floor (denser than the continents)
comes to plunge under the continents. These are the famous subduction
zones that you heard about at school. Add to this the collisions between
plates that form mountain ranges, and you get a fairly general,
simplified view of the major mechanisms that govern plate tectonics.
\"The Earth\'s surface is not only a puzzle, but a puzzle that moves and
whose number, size and shape of pieces change over time,\" summarizes
Boris Robert, paleomagnetist, lecturer at the University of Paris Cité
and the Institute of Earth Physics of Paris (IPGP). In a recent article
published in the journal Geoscience Frontiers, an international team
attempted to trace as finely as possible 1.8 billion years of evolution
of all these plates on the surface of the globe. The result is a fairly
hypnotic video, in which the plates are formed and unmade, expand and
deform, regularly alternating between grouped phases (with one or two
supercontinents) and dispersed phases (as is currently the case). The
researchers found three putative supercontinents in particular: Nuna
(around 1.5 billion years ago), Rodinia (between 900 and 750 million
years ago) and Pangea (between 320 and 200 million years ago). \"This is
a very commendable attempt at a very difficult exercise, in which we
rarely venture beyond a billion years,\" emphasizes Boris Robert, who
did not participate in this work. \"There are many points that will be
subject to debate, but the authors readily acknowledge this, detailing
their approach and their hypotheses. Their work has the merit of
existing and of offering a solid basis for discussion.\" The team brings
together six researchers with very diverse specialties around Dietmar
Müller, head of the EarthByte consortium (a collaboration whose
objective is to gather data to create a coherent geological model of the
Earth from its bowels to its surface). Among them, a Frenchman, Nicolas
Flament, a geodynamicist at the University of Wollongong. \"We tried to
be as transparent as possible, whether on the reference data we use or
on the hypotheses we took and the mathematical reconstruction models we
use which are open source,\" he explains. This can allow specialists to
check what we have done, or to adapt it. The discussion is open.\" The
great difficulty of the exercise lies in the extreme scarcity of data as
we go back in time. In this type of reconstruction, geologists rely on
bundles of clues. The most \"objective\" are paleomagnetic. Some rocks
have the property of recording the direction of the magnetic field, like
small compasses, at the time they were formed. By determining their age,
we can know how the piece of plate to which they belonged was oriented
and at what latitude it was located (thanks to its inclination relative
to the horizontal: if we commonly use 2D compasses to orient ourselves,
the direction of the field also has a vertical component). The problem
is that this data on the fossilization of the magnetic field is very
abundant for the ocean floor, but much rarer on the continents. However,
the ocean floor is no more than 200 million years old\... \"To give you
an idea, we have between 15,000 and 20,000 data points over this period
(depending on the quality criterion that we consider, Editor\'s note),
compared to only a few hundred points for the following 1.6 billion
years,\" explains Nicolas Flament. This nevertheless gives some points
of reference. The researchers then rely on other, more qualitative
geological data, such as the location and age of ancient mountains
(remains of collisions), the continuity of fossil records and
stratigraphic data, the compositions of ancient rocks which give clues
to their formation (magmatism is not the same in a subduction zone,
collision zone or at the level of a rift). To fill the gaps and move the
puzzle, scientists finally use what is called the principle of
actualism. \"We apply rules to the models that correspond to what we
currently observe, whether to trace the boundaries between the plates,
the speeds of movement, subduction, etc., recalls Maëlis Arnould,
lecturer at the geology laboratory of Lyon Terre, planètes,
environnement and at the Claude-Bernard Lyon 1 University. This is
obviously debatable because we do not know how far back plate tectonics
existed. Indeed, since the Earth was warmer 1.8 billion years ago, the
surface tectonics and the convection movements of the mantle that caused
it may have been completely different.\" For the time being, however,
this is the canonical method, because we do not yet understand the
entire process at work well enough to physically model the geodynamic
evolution of the planet very precisely, especially over long time
scales. \"The idea of such a reconstruction is not to say: \"This is
exactly how it happened\", but rather to give general ideas about what
seems plausible to us,\" Nicolas Flament points out. TV

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1708

In September 2023, the United Arab Emirates (UAE) made headlines with
the release of Falcon, its open-source large language model (LLM).
Remarkably, Falcon has managed to compete with, and even surpass, LLMs
from tech giants such as Meta (Facebook) and Alphabet (Google) on
several key metrics. Since then, the UAE has positioned itself at the
forefront of the global artificial intelligence (AI) race by regularly
releasing updates to its powerful model. These efforts have not gone
unnoticed: in April, Microsoft acquired a \$1.5 billion (€1.35 billion)
minority stake in G42, the UAE's flagship AI firm, underscoring the
country's growing influence. Analysts often attribute the UAE's
emergence in the sector to several factors, including strong government
support, abundant capital, and cheap electricity, all of which are
necessary for LLM training. But another important, and often overlooked,
factor is the country's authoritarian governance model, which allows the
government to leverage state power to drive technological innovation.
The UAE is not alone. Authoritarian countries, such as China, have a
competitive advantage in AI development, largely because of their demand
for domestic surveillance, which fuels AI companies. Facial recognition
technologies, for example, are used by these regimes not only to bolster
public security, but also as powerful tools to surveil their populations
and suppress dissent. In contrast, facial recognition has become a
source of enormous controversy in the West. The European Union's AI
regulation, which came into effect on August 1, effectively banned its
use in public spaces, with few exceptions. This gives AI companies in
China and the UAE a significant advantage over their Western
counterparts. Research by Harvard economics professor David Yang and his
co-authors shows that Chinese AI companies with government contracts
tend to be more innovative and commercially successful, accessing vast
amounts of public and private data to train and refine their models.
Similarly, UAE companies have been allowed to train their models on
anonymized healthcare data from state-backed hospitals and industries.
AI companies seeking to access such data in Western countries would face
numerous legal hurdles. While European and American companies face
strict compliance requirements and increased copyright infringement
lawsuits, Chinese and UAE companies operate in a much more relaxed
regulatory environment. This is not to say that authoritarian countries
do not have laws protecting data privacy or intellectual property. But
the national goal of promoting AI development often takes precedence,
resulting in lax enforcement of legislation. Key Resources Furthermore,
consumers in authoritarian countries tend to be more supportive of AI. A
2022 Ipsos survey ranked China and Saudi Arabia as the most optimistic
countries about AI. The widespread use of surveillance tools by these
regimes appears to have accelerated the commercial adoption of emerging
technologies. In addition, authoritarian governments benefit from the
ability to coordinate and direct resources toward innovation, including
through state-owned enterprises and sovereign wealth funds. Both the UAE
and China have implemented national strategies aimed at positioning
themselves as global leaders in AI. The Chinese government is not only a
policymaker, but also a supplier, customer, and investor in the sector.
The UAE has taken a similar approach. In 2017, it became the first
country to appoint a Minister of State for AI, whose primary mission is
to facilitate public-private partnerships and provide companies with
hands-on access to valuable training data. The Falcon AI model was
notably developed by the Institute for Technology Innovation, a
state-funded research center. G42, which is backed by the UAE's
sovereign wealth fund and chaired by the government's national security
adviser, collaborates with a variety of government agencies. Recognizing
the critical role of academic research in technological advancement, the
UAE also established the Mohamed Bin Zayed University of Artificial
Intelligence, the world's first dedicated exclusively to AI. Despite the
many similarities between the UAE and China's strategies, one key
difference stands out: While China's advances in cutting-edge technology
may be hampered by Western restrictions on exports of chips and
equipment, the UAE enjoys unfettered access to these critical resources.
In 2023, G42 signed a \$100 million deal with California-based startup
Cerebras to build the world's largest supercomputer, designed to train
AI. In early 2024, the company reportedly began talks with OpenAI CEO
Sam Altman about a potential investment in an ambitious semiconductor
company that could challenge Nvidia's dominance in the sector. But the
real reasons for the UAE's success remain largely obscured. Tellingly,
Altman recently suggested that the country could "lead the conversation"
on AI policy, acting as a "regulatory sandbox" for the rest of the
world. In praising the UAE's approach, he glosses over a fundamental
point: it cannot be replicated in a democratic environment.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1709

In Menlo Park (California), at Meta\'s headquarters, Mark Zuckerberg put
on a show of force on Wednesday evening. In black jeans and a t-shirt,
the boss of Meta even took on the role of super salesman, presenting his
new products and services for forty-five minutes, with demonstrations
and guests to support him. The few bugs did not dampen his good mood. At
the heart of most of these new features is his AI assistant, Meta AI,
which can answer questions, write messages and provide different types
of content (images, travel itineraries, etc.). Competition has
intensified over the past two years with the breakthrough of generative
AI and the arrival of new conversational assistants (Gemini, Copilot,
etc.) in the wake of ChatGPT. \"Meta AI is on track to become the most
widely used AI assistant in the world by the end of the year. In fact,
it probably already is,\" Mark Zuckerberg proudly declared. Its
assistant has "nearly" 500 million monthly users, up from 400 million a
month ago, and more than 185 million every week. For its part, its big
rival, ChatGPT, has 200 million weekly users, twice as many as last
November. Meta is reaching this milestone before even launching its AI
assistant in several major markets such as Brazil and the European
Union, where it has decided -- like Apple -- to give up marketing it for
the moment due to regulations that are too restrictive for its taste. To
date, India is its largest market, largely thanks to WhatsApp, which has
500 million users in the country. Meta\'s ambition is to integrate its
AI assistant into all of its platforms, whether it\'s its social
networks (Facebook, WhatsApp, Instagram, Threads, etc.), its Quest mixed
reality headset - the more accessible \"3S\" version of which has just
been released - or its connected glasses (Ray-Ban Meta) in order to
improve the consumer experience and extend the duration of use. In a
highly competitive landscape, where Microsoft, Google and OpenAI have
taken a head start, Meta has accelerated its AI efforts in recent
months. It has thus extended its range of open source language models
(open and free for developers) to continue to expand uses. \"Today, we
are making our Meta AI assistant smarter with Llama 3.2,\" commented
Mark Zuckerberg. Meta AI now also relies on voice, as has been the case
since last June with ChatGPT. Internet users can therefore speak to
their assistant when they use Meta\'s apps. And Meta AI answers them,
with the possibility of choosing artificial voices or celebrity voices
(Judi Dench, Awkwafina, etc.). \"Voice will become an even more natural
way to interact than text,\" predicts the boss of Meta. For users based
in the United States, Meta AI will also be able to see. This will allow
it to say more about what certain photos contain, or even modify them,
by removing or adding an object, or changing the background. \"Meta is
no longer just fumbling around in AI, it aims to dominate it,\" comments
Jeremy Goldman, a tech analyst at eMarketer. The assistant has also been
integrated for several months into smart glasses designed by Meta and
EssilorLuxottica, which have just renewed their partnership until 2030.
Mark Zuckerberg sees glasses as a \"new category of AI-based products\",
a \"natural computing platform\". With their integrated cameras,
microphones and headphones, Ray-Ban Meta glasses - which are widely used
today to take photos and videos - have been a commercial success for a
year. They will now allow you to converse, scan QR Codes or telephone
numbers. The assistant can translate what an interlocutor says, with a
slight latency, or remind the user of certain things. It will soon be
able to listen to audio via Spotify, Amazon Music or Audible with a
simple voice command. \"We are adding video to Meta AI so that the
glasses can see what you see in real time. Meta AI will be able to help
you more naturally, in real time, to explore a city or prepare a meal\",
the group explains. Meta also unveiled Orion on Wednesday, a prototype
of augmented reality glasses that he has been working on for ten years,
in direct competition with the model presented two weeks ago by Snap.
This is the most futuristic part of his device. He designs them as a
\"time travel machine\", convinced that these glasses with superpowers
will eventually be able to replace smartphones: Mark Zuckerberg wants to
build \"the future of human interactions\". KL

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1710

Bourg-Saint-Maurice, Chambéry (Savoie), Échirolles (Isère) - special
correspondents - Ten years later, Aloïs Chassot is still surprised:
\"When we arrived at the town hall, in 2014, Chambéry was pretty close
to zero in terms of digital technology.\" The man who was at the time
deputy mayor (LR) took up the subject, equipped the schools of the
Savoyard town of sixty thousand inhabitants and launched into the
creation of a digital data collection network. He wanted to open up the
field of possibilities: measuring, with a view to improving it, the air
quality in different places; triggering a round of the garbage truck
based on the quantity of waste already collected\... \"Until 2018, a
water service agent crisscrossed the town on a scooter to send back the
data collected by digital sensors, which allowed residents to receive a
bill twice a year,\" he jokes. Today, data collection is carried out
remotely. In 2020, when the left came to power, deputy Benjamin Louis
took up the torch, without sweeping aside the work already accomplished
but with other priorities. His roadmap has five objectives: digital
technology must be of general interest, inclusive, social, respect the
environment and support the local economy. Under his leadership, the
youth space in the priority Hauts-de-Chambéry district, La Dynamo, has
become a veritable hive of digital technology. Ten city agents work
there (including work-study students and civic service), for eighteen
thousand visits per year, according to the coordinator, Elsa Chapelle.
The local branch of the Simplon digital school is setting up there, and
more accessible workshops are offered to seniors and younger people.
Finally, a FabLab welcomes young people who have dropped out of school.
\"We want to give them back the taste for doing, and they see that with
digital technology it is possible to make different things,\" whether
everyday objects or any invention, explains Mr. Louis. The Dynamo
constitutes a \"base camp\", with an operating budget of 30,000 euros
per year since 2023, but the goal is to reach as many residents as
possible and therefore \"shine across the entire city\", assures the
elected official. Four councilors from the third place offer their
digital assistance in different neighborhoods of the municipality. A
terminal, being tested in an annex town hall, also allows residents to
carry out all the procedures useful to them, from the purchase of tax
stamps to updates with France Travail. \"We have no choice, it is
urgent,\" assures Benjamin Louis. Digital technology still worries
people, we must help users to take hold of it.\" Including city
officials: \"We must acculturate them to digital technology and help
them transform their way of working. » Echirolles has also faced this
challenge. To develop its digital strategy, this Isère town of
thirty-seven thousand inhabitants has chosen to use open-source
software, computer programs that can be used, developed and shared
freely, in a spirit of collaboration between users. This has involved a
significant change in organization and mentality internally. Hands in
the grease \"It\'s a challenge in terms of recruiting and training our
teams,\" acknowledges Nicolas Vivant, director of digital strategy and
culture at Echirolles. \"But, over the past three years, the team has
seen a huge increase in skills, because you really have to get your
hands dirty. Our choice also attracts qualified young people from top
schools who are looking for more meaning in their work,\" emphasizes the
director, who is fighting against the inevitable \"resistance to
change.\" To overcome reluctance, the city\'s IT departments use
software that is as close as possible to traditional software in terms
of its operation and interface, or improve those that are already in
use. \"I am very careful to ensure that we do not lose quality. This
also allows us to work on certain preconceived ideas and to show that
free software is not ugly or complex,\" adds Nicolas Vivant. Ten years
after signing the Free Software Charter in 2014, Echirolles has become
exemplary and a driving force on the subject, through the Alpes
Numérique libre collective of municipalities. Zorin OS instead of
Windows, LibreOffice instead of Word, BigBlueButton instead of Teams\...
The city now uses free software in all areas, with the exception of
human resources and finance. \"These are areas that are too dependent on
legislation and its developments,\" says Mr. Vivant. Originally, the
will of Echirolles, a historic stronghold of the French Communist Party
(PCF), was political. \"Free software is at the crossroads of
environmental transition, digital sovereignty, data protection,
inclusion and the fight against digital divides,\" lists Aurélien Farge,
deputy mayor in charge of the development of free digital technology.
This type of software, which does not require paying a license or
committing to a maintenance contract, also gives teams greater freedom.
\"It allows you to be agile and innovative, without the constraint of
having to be profitable,\" argues Nicolas Vivant. For residents, who use
services such as online appointment booking, the changes made are
invisible. \"On the other hand, what is not are the savings made on
public finances,\" notes Mr. Vivant. These unspent sums thanks to free
software have been estimated at 350,000 euros per year. Transition of
the territory Some 140 kilometers away, in Bourg-Saint-Maurice (seven
thousand inhabitants), the economic aspect also weighed in favor of
integrating digital technology into local life. This Savoyard commune
located in the heart of the Tarentaise, home to a ski resort, Les Arcs,
has its eyes turned towards the future. \"We live in a fantastic place
and we have a very good activity around skiing, that\'s undeniable. But
we are also quite isolated. And the major crisis that the ski industry
is about to experience due to global warming must be anticipated,\"
considers the mayor, Guillaume Desrues (various). Shortly after his
election, in 2020, he opened a connected campus - there are now around a
hundred of these places in France, which allow distance learning.
Sylvain Cachat, 40, becomes the manager, responsible for supporting
students, giving them confidence and helping them understand the
courses. The first intake of the Alpine Campus (the only one in the
sector located in a town supporting a resort) will take place in
September 2022, in a district that is currently undergoing rapid
development. \"Training plays a key role in the transition of the
territory,\" says Mr. Cachat. \"We are showing here that everyone\'s
destiny is not set in stone, that in Bourg-Saint-Maurice, there is more
than just skiing or working in a resort.\" Twenty-three students are
starting their school year this September. They are taking courses in
geography, business or psychology, for example, with the National Center
for Distance Learning (CNED), universities or French grandes écoles.
\"There are one hundred and forty distance learning courses offered on
Parcoursup,\" recalls Sylvain Cachat. At a time when \"local companies
are struggling to recruit,\" work-study distance learning can, according
to him, be one solution among others. \"We can say to students: \'OK to
accept you on campus, on the condition that you stay in the town for the
part of your training in the company.\'\" It is also a way of keeping
its population on site year-round, while Bourg-Saint-Maurice lost more
than five hundred inhabitants between 2010 and 2021, a large proportion
of them young people between 15 and 29 years old.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1711

Doctor of public law, teacher and secretary general of the National
Digital Council, Jean Cattan analyzes France\'s strategy in the face of
the democratic challenges raised by digital technology. France très haut
débit, New Deal Mobile, French Tech, France 2030, Open Data... Have
government plans to support digital inclusion created a \"French-style
digital\"? Each of these programs works to empower as many people as
possible to act. This marks a very favorable turning point in France,
highlighted by Sébastien Soriano in his book Un avenir pour le service
public (Odile Jacob, 2020). Thus, the France très haut débit plan,
launched in 2013, or the New Deal Mobile, signed by telecom operators in
2018, have reversed the traditionally top-down relationship that the
State can have with local and economic actors to give them power. A more
recent event has reinforced this movement: following the lockdowns, the
role played by some citizens in the deployment of digital portals linked
to Covid has encouraged the State to support citizen initiatives
contributing to public service missions. The citizen initiative
accelerator of the Interministerial Directorate for Digital
Transformation or the citizen digital reserve, currently being set up,
which both echo ideas put forward by Paul Duan \[a social
entrepreneur\], are moving in this direction. But much remains to be
done: accessibility issues are far from being resolved and digital
technology has a great deal of responsibility in the fragmentation of
our society as well as in its control. This is why it is urgent to
initiate a real debate on the relationship between the administrative
State and citizens and to make digital technology an object of
democracy. What are the priorities for the future? The rise since 2018
of the Numérique en commun\[s\] approach, intended to \"build a digital
world of general interest\", shows the benefits of bringing together
local stakeholders, which the National Agency for Territorial Cohesion,
Mednum (digital mediation cooperative) and many other stakeholders work
towards on a daily basis. The \"France numérique ensemble\" roadmap,
established in 2023, should provide the foundations for this synergy.
France is investing in the field of digital commons, these digital
resources produced, managed and governed by communities of users. This
is the case for the Forge des communs numériques éducatifs and its 1,300
projects, the deployment within the State of free software such as
BigBlueButton (videoconferencing software) or PeerTube in all academies
(decentralized video sharing). So many projects that owe a lot to the
work of the agents of the digital education department and which
indicate a way forward. But isn\'t this quest futile, even chimerical,
in the face of the risk of digital downgrading and the power of Gafam
(Google, Apple, Facebook, Amazon and Microsoft)? On the contrary, this
perspective must be our response, and it will be a guarantee of social
success for the future. Wherever digital giants try to increase their
footprint on society, we must multiply the social ties that unite us.
This is why we must capitalize on the network of thousands of digital
advisors and the 2,700 France Services counters throughout the
territory. Because, beyond online administrative assistance, these
programs can be decisive in developing a social ties policy adapted to
the digital age. As the National Digital Council (CNNum) points out in
its book Itinéraires numériques (2023), these programs lead us to think
about a new relationship between citizens and the administration, moving
from face-to-face to side-by-side, and contribute to thinking about a
local State, supporting the population, rather than a State that
commands and controls remotely. Another innovation, on May 21, the
President of the Republic entrusted CNNum with the task of structuring
Café IA. This knowledge-sharing mechanism on artificial intelligence, in
any place such as colleges, media libraries, businesses, associations or
town halls, aims to allow everyone to debate and decide on their
technological uses. Isn\'t this unique path contradictory to the digital
single market dominated by the American Gafam, and to the global
Internet? On the economic level, the strategy led by France is
completely integrated into European policy. And the search for
empowerment of the population joins the action taken against the
nuisance power of a minority of dominant economic actors towards the
majority. This action is a common thread of European digital economic
policies from the telecoms directives of the 1980s to the Digital
Markets Act (European regulation on digital markets), via the Open
Internet Regulation (enshrining net neutrality), and numerous decisions
on competition. While these digital giants are only capable of
innovating for the common good on the margins, we, Europeans, must
impose strong lines of conduct on them in terms of openness, but also
respect for people and the environment. Isn\'t it David versus Goliath?
I would say yes, because in history, it is David who wins. But the
victory will be that of all and not that of one camp over another. To
address the potential for harm from very large digital companies, we can
and must remove their monopoly on all the features that make up their
services. What we did yesterday for telecom operators, starting with
unbundling \[which opened up the fixed-line telephone network to
competition\], we must do for social networks and generative artificial
intelligence. We must impose rules on them: interoperability,
interconnection rates, non-discrimination, environmental thresholds,
openness, information sharing, etc. This is the condition on which we
will be able to reconcile innovation, well-being and democracy.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1712

Marseille - Correspondence - In Marseille, the issue of schools has been
made a priority by the left-wing, civic and environmental coalition in
power since June 2020. Launched in the high-stakes political challenge
of renovating 188 schools in ten years for a budget of nearly 1.5
billion euros, the Printemps marseillais (PM) and its leader, the
diverse left-wing mayor Benoît Payan, have also decided to implement a
digital strategy for the city\'s 470 primary and nursery schools. This
\"major digital plan for schools\", developed after a series of
consultations with representatives of the educational community, was
voted on in April 2021, then reoriented and extended in July 2023. It is
part of a broader desire to better control the use, cost and effects of
new technologies at the municipal level. A desire that was made concrete
by joining the charter of good practices of the Responsible Digital
Institute in April 2023. \"This charter is based on four pillars:
security, environmental and financial sobriety, accessibility and
ethics\... These are all areas that we are implementing in schools,\"
explains the municipal councilor responsible for digital technology,
Christophe Hugon (Pirate Party). \"The new municipality has taken a
clear turn. Where other cities treat digital technology in schools using
a purely technical approach, in Marseille, political leaders are
strongly committed to the issue,\" notes Dorie Bruyas, director of the
Lyon association Fréquence écoles, which has been examining digital uses
for thirty years. \"Mobile digital classroom\" First important choice:
Marseille does not provide its students with a computer or tablet that
they can take home with them, as the Bouches-du-Rhône departmental
council does for middle schools. Too early, according to elected
officials. Too expensive, too. \"The idea is to train before equipping.
We don\'t want students to be immersed in digital technology too much,
but to enter middle school having mastered uses other than social
networks,\" continues Christophe Hugon. \"In primary school, we have
decided to favor non-permanent use supervised by teachers. It is up to
them to judge the educational interest of digital technology based on
the activities,\" explains the deputy for schools Pierre Huguet (PM),
pilot of the \"major digital plan\". To enable this occasional use, each
elementary school has been equipped since 2023 with at least one
\"mobile digital classroom\". This is a cart equipped with sixteen
tablets and a station for the teacher providing access to a catalog of
nearly 2,000 educational resources. At the start of the 2024 school
year, 7,531 tablets were available for 40,000 primary school students.
In 2026, there should be more than 8,500. The other equipment component
of the \"grand plan\", validated by the national education system,
consists of installing an interactive digital screen (ENI) in all
primary school classes, but also one per nursery school. Easy in new
buildings. It is more complex in old, degraded establishments or in
restricted spaces. Despite everything, Marseille intends to reach its
objective in 2026 with 2,450 screens in operation. Concerning these ENI,
the rules are the same as for the rest of the municipal IT equipment.
The machines must remain \"open\", accept the operating system and the
digital work environment desired by the city, without the latter being
captive to a subscription. A great supporter of free software,
Christophe Hugon successfully negotiated this point. \"Our advantage in
convincing suppliers is that our orders are large\", explains the
elected official. The screens must also meet the sustainability criteria
now imposed by the municipality. \"There is no question of finding an
ENI in a cellar, gathering dust,\" warns the digital advisor, who has
made the reuse and reconditioning strategy a central axis of his policy.
\"We are implementing very precise monitoring so that the equipment
deployed has three, four, five life cycles,\" he explains. In his
vision, computers can go from administrative offices to classrooms, then
to documentation rooms, and finally be offered, after being equipped
with a free Linux operating system, to associations that fight against
significant digital insecurity in the city. All this while relying on
the repair and reconditioning workshop of the municipal service
responsible for school IT (CIME), which has seen its staff increase over
the past four years. \"Apple has even agreed to train our agents and
provide the equipment needed to repair its products. This allows us to
have machines that are around ten years old and work perfectly,\"
rejoices Christophe Hugon. A management that has made it possible to
halve the municipality\'s annual equipment purchasing budget, assures
the elected official. At SNUipp, the main union of primary school
teachers, the \"major digital plan\" is being viewed with some
hindsight. \"It\'s not the priority issue in Marseille schools,\" judges
Mickaël Brégliano, delegate in the city center sector. \"I don\'t know
many colleagues who say \"Long live the ENIs\". Some adapt to them,
others less so. The majority were more in favor of deploying video
projectors, which do not deprive them of a real board,\" he notes. For
him, who teaches at the National school, whose premises are extremely
dilapidated and whose renovation has been announced, teachers are rather
suffering from the poor quality of the networks. Tinkering \"The Wi-Fi
doesn\'t work everywhere. We tinker a lot, sometimes with our own
connections,\" he says. A problem identified by the municipality, which
wants to reduce, wherever possible, the use of Wi-Fi, which consumes
more energy than using cables (fiber or ADSL) to connect to the
Internet. To finance its \"grand plan\", it responded to the call for
projects from the Digital Educational Territories (TNE), launched by the
State, and obtained a subsidy of 5 million euros from the Caisse des
Dépôts et Consignations, out of a total bill of 11.6 million. The
agreement covers the equipment of schools, the provision of the catalog
of educational resources, but also a \"parenting and inclusion\"
component, entrusted to the Ligue de l\'enseignement, with very broad
objectives. \"Helping parents access digital administrative procedures
for registering and monitoring their children\'s schooling, raising
their awareness of issues relating to the quantity and quality of screen
time, safe Internet browsing, or enabling them to develop digital
activities as a family,\" lists the head of the structure, Sophie
Lorimier, whose teams have worked with 500 parents of pupils during
around forty sessions during the 2023-2024 school year. Marseille has
also launched a collaboration with the National Commission for
Information Technology and Civil Liberties. One thousand one hundred
pupils in nine pilot schools have been made aware of the dangers of
digital technology, from fake news to cyberbullying. A system that the
municipality intends to develop this year and offer to volunteer
schools.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1713

Benoît Cœuré is the president of the Competition Authority, which issued
an opinion on the artificial intelligence (AI) sector in June. The
regulator, like its counterparts in Washington and Brussels, is warning
of the risk of seeing giants like Google, Microsoft, Meta and Amazon use
their strength in the digital sector to crush this market and its
start-ups. The Competition Authority is also, Mr. Cœuré emphasizes,
\"completely\" ready to intervene if necessary in negotiations between
AI manufacturers and content producers, while initial agreements have
been reached between OpenAI and News Corp (The Wall Street Journal,
etc.), Prisa (El Pais, etc.) and, in France, Le Monde. How does AI pose
a competition problem? Like all digital technologies, generative AI
raises competition problems because it carries within it a logic of
concentration and accumulation. The more data we have or the more users
we have, the more we will be able to innovate. After an initial phase of
a profusion of initiatives, we have often seen, in these sectors, a
phase of consolidation until there are only a few players left, or even
just one. These players then risk excluding their competitors or
imposing unfair conditions on their customers and suppliers. They build
a fortress or a walled garden. Why do digital giants like Google,
Microsoft or Meta risk dominating AI? Because the production of
generative AI is based on inputs that are data, computing capacity, i.e.
processors, and talent. Its distribution, for companies, is based on
online service platforms in the cloud \[dematerialized computing\] and,
for individuals, on mobile environments, search engines, social
networks, etc. However, today, a handful of companies, most of them
American, already have a very strong position in all these areas. This
is a new situation. AI is the first technology to be dominated by large
players from the outset. Usually, a disruptive innovation carries the
promise of replacing technologies and ending the rents of existing
players. Thus, Google, Amazon, Facebook, Apple, Microsoft or Netflix
were, at the start, small players, who had a brilliant idea. In AI,
there is of course the power of ideas, among smaller players like OpenAI
or Mistral AI. But regulators fear that, very quickly, these will be
used to strengthen the power of large players. What can we expect from
competition investigations into the acquisition of stakes in the capital
of AI start-ups by cloud giants who provide them with computing
capacity, like Microsoft in OpenAI or Google and Amazon in Anthropic? I
cannot comment on the investigations of other authorities, but I
understand their concern. We are the arbiters of economic competition:
it is normal for there to be winners, but we want to make sure that they
have not doped themselves up or tripped up their competitors. Growth
through acquisitions is part of the life cycle of companies, but it can
also help eliminate rivals or create a powerful ecosystem that will
deter competition. In AI, we do have evidence that large players will
sometimes seek to acquire technology or skills by using their financial
resources to take over other companies. This can also take the form of
hiring teams from a start-up \[like Microsoft, Google and Amazon with
Inflection AI, Character.ai and Adept AI\]. What types of partnerships
between start-ups and giants do not pose competition problems? A
non-exclusive partnership that allows small players to rely on larger
companies is, in principle, less problematic. I am thinking, for
example, of the partnerships that Mistral AI is establishing with
Microsoft and other cloud platforms \[which distribute the French
start-up\'s AI models to companies\]. Present in Anthropic, Amazon or
Google argue that they do not have a representative on the board of
directors or exclusive agreements. Is this convincing? I cannot speak
about a subject that we are not investigating, but this is the kind of
point that must be analyzed. Is there control? Where does it come from?
It can be capitalistic or done through human resources, through
technology or even economic, if the acquirer is a major client or a
major supplier of its target. Microsoft is the exclusive distributor of
OpenAI models in the cloud. And you have proposed integrating certain AI
services present in the cloud into the European Digital Markets Act
(DMA) regulation. Would this have an impact? The DMA was invented to
complement competition law investigations, which are conducted a
posteriori, with a regulation that prohibits certain anti-competitive
behaviors a priori. It was created for search engines, social networks
or mobile app stores, but it is normal to wonder how to apply it to AI.
And cloud services, in particular platforms that make AI models
available, seem to be a fairly natural application case. It is of course
up to the European Commission to lead this reflection. This could make
it possible to ensure that the distribution of AI tools to companies
does not give rise to unfair behaviors such as "self-preference" -- if
an actor favors its services and those of its partners -- or exclusion,
if it sets technical or commercial conditions that disadvantage its
competitors. The economic benefits of AI will only materialize if the
public authorities impose competition, not only upstream of this market,
to allow new players to remain present in the production of models, but
also downstream, to ensure the distribution of this software under
affordable conditions for all companies. The digital giants also have
the advantage of deploying their AI on their consumer services:
smartphones, search engines, office software, etc. On this other aspect
of the downstream of AI, the risk is the creation of integrated systems
with exclusive technologies or partnerships, in which users will be
trapped. In digital, the barriers to entry can be technical -- such as
the lack of interoperability preventing the transfer of data from one
ecosystem to another -- or economic, such as the cost of changing
operator. We recommend instead open systems allowing users to choose
their services, from different providers. Should AI be included in the
DMA so that, on the Google search engine, you can use ChatGPT instead of
Google\'s AI assistant or, on your iPhone, Le Chat de Mistral AI instead
of ChatGPT, Apple\'s partner? \"Essential platform services\", such as
search engines, social networks or operating systems, are already
covered by the DMA. The European Commission, which is responsible for
its implementation, will be able to verify that the addition of AI
functionalities does not create inequities or exclusions. Could this be
a lever to force platforms to offer Internet users a choice of AI
assistant? Yes, but with reasonable and objective implementation,
because we are not here to make life difficult for users. Apple has said
it is suspending the launch of its AI assistant on its smartphones in
the EU because of the DMA, implying that the regulation deprives
Europeans of innovation\... Apple cannot impose its rules on Europe. The
DMA is not a barrier to innovation, but rather aims to prevent the
domination of a few players. If adaptations are necessary, the DMA
itself provides that Apple can discuss them with the European
Commission. This is not a reason to punish European users. Does the
publication of AI models in open source improve competition or does it
allow large players such as Meta to impose their model, as Google did
with the Android mobile environment? In our June opinion, we took a
nuanced position. In principle, open source is a good thing, because it
allows small players to use the work of large creators of AI models.
Innovation is \"dwarves standing on the shoulders of giants\", said
Isaac Newton. However, Android\'s experience with Google shows that an
open system can also be used to establish dominance and then close in on
users who are held captive. We will therefore have to pay attention to
the evolution of open source AI models. There is also a need for
transparency and independent certification on their degree of openness:
we often do not know on what data they were trained. The first paid
agreements have been signed between AI manufacturers and content
producers. Is there a risk that this will close the market to certain
players? Yes, on both sides of the market. These agreements could
benefit the largest content producers or those deemed most interesting
by AI manufacturers, and not all rights holders. These partnerships
could also only benefit the major AI players. For example, one of them
could pay very generously for press articles so that it is the only one
who can use them. Could you intervene, as you did in the negotiations
between the French media and Google on the remuneration, through
neighboring rights, for the reprinting of excerpts from their articles
on its search engines? Yes, absolutely. We are also the first
competition authority in the world to have done so: in March, in our
condemnation of Google for failure to comply with its commitments on
related rights, one of the reasons was that it had not informed press
publishers that their articles were being used to train its AI
assistant. In addition, at the time, Google had offered them the right
of withdrawal that is enshrined in law in a way that was too dissuasive:
if they had refused to train the AIs, their articles would have been
removed from the search engine. In the future, economic questions will
arise: what is the price of this content? Is it set fairly? It would be
necessary to integrate the fact that different data can have different
values in different contexts. And to propose varied contract structures,
such as publisher grouping contracts. Should we also introduce a flat
rate price for access to data for small publishers who do not have the
administrative capacity to manage contracts? It is up to the industry
and the public authorities to decide. Could the authority intervene if
an AI manufacturer refused to negotiate with media outlets while
promising not to use their content, as OpenAI did with the French unions
APIG and SEPM? I cannot prejudge this because, if the authority were to
be notified, it would analyse such a situation in a concrete manner,
depending in particular -- but not only -- on the market power of the AI
manufacturer and the nature of the content. But we would carry out a
careful examination. More generally, if we consider that AI will change
the future of the economy, or even of our societies, we cannot leave the
allocation of its resources entirely to private actors. It is legitimate
for public and political authorities to be interested in it.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1714

After being the subject of much attention, recycling, long presented as
the solution to all-plastic, is now the subject of much criticism. On
the other hand, a more virtuous alternative is emerging: the recovery of
plastic. The difference may seem subtle, but it is far from it: in the
first case, for example, the calorific value of used plastic will be
used as a substitute for coal in a cement plant; in the other, the idea
is to use the raw material to produce a new, more valuable item. This is
developing in all sectors, from fashion to toys, including furniture. It
is with this in mind that the idea of promoting \"upcycling\" in the
field of furniture emerged, born from the meeting of two players in the
protection of the oceans. On one side, the Fondation de la mer, which
has been raising awareness of the subject for ten years and concretely
fighting against this pollution, under the leadership of its president,
Sabine Roux de Bézieux. On the other side, the Breton entrepreneur
Didier Tabary, a sea lover, founder of the Kresk cosmetics group (SVR,
Lazartigue, Filmed brands) and his Kresk 4 Oceans endowment fund,
created in 2021. Together, they launched a so-called \"upcycling\"
program in partnership. The idea is to set up local plastic processing
channels, in a circular economy logic. \"Acting on land is essential to
prevent plastic from reaching the ocean. It is especially crucial to act
upstream and reduce plastic production. But since it is there, we must
recycle it, reuse it and, as soon as possible, give it back value, a
more sustainable value,\" explains Didier Tabary. Eighty-nine
associations were identified, 33 financed, including four refinanced,
for a total amount of 350,000 euros, which represents 630 tonnes of
waste avoided and 78 jobs in 23 territories. Some of them, such as La
Plastiquerie in Bordeaux, mainly source from large manufacturers. The
transformation of used SFR internet boxes into wall coverings for a shop
of the operator in Sénart, in Seine-et-Marne, was its first
demonstrator. Since then, the list of its suppliers has grown: Thales,
Suez, Ikea\... With the Swedish distributor, the idea is to prevent
2,000 yellow and blue bags from ending up in the trash each year. But it
also makes screens with chocolate molds. \"We tend to source our
products from SMEs rather than large manufacturers, as our production
quantities are limited to around ten tonnes per year,\" explains Nicolas
Voisard, co-founder and designer of the Rehab workshop, located in
Concarneau, near Quimper. Wall coverings are its most promising outlet,
with the Tour de France (goodies for the VIP area), the surf brand
Billabong (wax combs for boards) and Greet Hotel (Accor group) already
serving as customer references. Resak, based in the Basque Country,
responded to a call for tenders to reuse plastic waste from a hospital
(Ramsay Santé) in a closed loop (insulation panels, creation of objects,
etc.). \"While most calls for tenders take place at the national level,
Ademe is beginning to understand that local projects may make more sense
and are more agile than national projects,\" says Lila Costes of the
association. Régénération, based near Royan, which gets its supplies
from the household waste collection and treatment company in Nord-Médoc,
Smicotom, does not limit itself to working with plastic. \"Since this
program is reserved for associations, we have the status of SCIC
(collective interest cooperative society, Editor\'s note). Because this
financial support is a real boost for us. But like others, we want to
switch to a business and become independent,\" says Julie Vigne,
interior design project manager at the association. All these processes
require complex equipment. \"A machine can cost 10,000 to 15,000
euros,\" explains Étienne Poirier, president of the Atelier des
Recycleurs fous. This collective of citizens composed of creatives,
engineers, designers and craftsmen, based near Les Herbiers, in Vendée,
has launched into the design and sale of tools to carry out these
plastic recovery projects: crusher, milling machine, press, extruder,
injector\... The idea came to them when they discovered that the
Precious Plastic movement, initiated by Dutch designer Dave Hakkens in
2015, shared the plans for its machines in open source (free license).
It is up to each person to manufacture them on this basis. Most of the
structures supported by the \"upcycling\" program of the Fondation de la
mer and Kresk 4 Oceans obtain their supplies from the Vendée player. In
fact, many of them work together and exchange contacts and best
practices. In good logic of the circular economy.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1715

Cultural periodicals fear for their survival and are demanding better
funding to be able to continue their mission Relations magazine is in a
coma; À bâbord! and Hors champ are turning to crowdfunding. And the new
funding allocation for the operations of the Conseil des arts et des
lettres du Québec (CALQ) is proving insufficient for the majority of
periodicals. The result? Lurelu, the only magazine devoted to
children\'s literature, is also at stake for its survival. And the
Société de développement des époquets culturels no longer has the means
to maintain its brand new website\... which pooled the sale and
subscriptions of cultural publications. Review of the state of the
periodicals. \"Since July, everyone has been in shock at their budget
columns,\" explains Hélène Hotton, general director of the Société de
développement des époquets culturels (SODEP). \"I feel like we\'re just
a bunch of deer frozen in the headlights of our Excel files, wondering
how not to run a structural deficit. \"If, as is the case now, our
subsidies do not allow us to keep up with the dramatic increase in the
price of paper, printing and transportation, we are suffocating the
magazines,\" continues Ms. Hotton. A survey conducted among SODEP
members reveals that on average, local cultural magazines, historically
not rich, have obtained 70% of the amount they had requested from the
CALQ. The 15 publications that responded to the questionnaire will have
an average of \$70,529 per year for the next four years. To operate, pay
rent, employees, collaborators and journalists, and produce, of course,
issues. This CALQ subsidy constitutes for the majority of publications
some 75% of the funding. Some also receive, or rather, money from the
Conseil des arts de Montréal and the Canada Book Fund. To avoid red ink,
\"the magazines are making different choices: cutting pages, cutting
issues, reducing the number of employees, cutting salaries, cutting
columns, reducing collaborators,\" adds Hélène Hotton. \"Which means
that the conditions of cultural workers are getting worse. And some
magazines are thinking about closing.\" Period magazines Esse, Planches,
Ciel variable, Ciné-Bulles, Moveo, Nouveaux cahiers du socialisme (yes!
yes!)\... Very few Quebecers know about these publications, which are
considered successful based on 1,000 subscribers. Too niche? No longer
of their time? Absolutely not, according to Gina Cortopassi, assistant
editor of Espace, which has 250 subscribers. \"Cultural periodicals
animate, fuel and legitimize specific artistic practice environments and
communities,\" she explains. \"They give their actors a voice and an
influence outside of traditional presentation venues---artist centres,
cultural centres, museums, theatres. They are essential to the
development of practices and discourses to describe, understand and
appreciate them.\" \"Judging a cultural magazine with the same standards
of performance and distribution as mass media is a profound injustice,\"
believes Ms. Cortopassi. Hélène Hotton continues: \"It\'s really the
entire intelligentsia of Quebec that writes in cultural magazines.
That\'s where most of the movements that have led to social change are
born. That\'s where feminism, counterculture, and the artistic
avant-gardes were first thought of.\" \"I had a lot of hope when the
government\'s new plan on the French language came out in April,\"
continues the director of SODEP. \"If the government says that it\'s its
priority to promote and shine, protect, and defend French-language
content, it seems to me that this should extend to cultural magazines.\"
Because they have been, since the Gazette littéraire de Montréal in
1778, one of the \"historic and privileged vehicles of Quebec and French
thought. \"It\'s not Bombardier, you little jerk, who\'s going to
promote the French language in Quebec culture!\" exclaims the director,
before recovering with a laugh: \"S\'cuse, I have the Gaspésienne coming
out again\... I\'m so discouraged\...\" Out of sight of readers, out of
mind Cultural magazines are trying to recover from a serious
distribution problem. During acquisitions between distributors, from
2014 to 2016, when Benjamin moved to LMPI then to Messageries
Dynamiques, and then LMPI to Disticor, these publications were dumped:
not profitable enough. \"Whereas we could previously buy cultural
magazines at Jean Coutu and at the convenience store, from one day to
the next we no longer saw them at all, anywhere. We have been working
for years at SODEP to repair this historic deficit in visibility,\"
recalls Hélène Hotton. "Since the pandemic, the government has been
telling us all the time, 'Be bold!', 'Reinvent yourself!', 'Innovate!',
'Help your community!' And we, the arts service organizations, have been
told, 'Share!', 'Create services!', 'Get off the platforms!' The money
was there. We got it. We did it. We developed SODEP Diffusion, with
Dimedia, to meet the specific needs of magazines. We got them into
bookstores. Now, we're arriving in museum boutiques, theatres, artist
centres, where there is a natural audience." Hélène Hotton says that
after designing a new website, her organization saw magazine sales
increase by 30% in the first six months. But the lack of resources is
now threatening the sustainability of the platforms developed to adapt
to the new context. \"These are cuts in the tools that we put in place
so that things could start to go better for us. I find myself no longer
able to pay for my website maintenance. And I\'m in open source. Imagine
the cultural organizations that had custom sites made with all the great
subsidies granted to digital.\" \"With our very small teams, we can\'t
manage to boost subscriptions in two years, set up a specialized
broadcasting service, or federate all subscriptions on a transactional
site. We can just do it little by little.\" \"When you give resources to
develop, but not to support afterwards, what do you call that? For me,
it\'s cultural money thrown down the drain.\" Money on paper SODEP was
granted an increase by CALQ, however. \"True,\" confirms Hélène Hotton,
\"but compared to the amount she received in 2017. It\'s less than what
we received the two previous years, when bonuses were granted and
mutualization projects were funded.\" \"I have the same financial
problem as my member magazines,\" says the person who runs their
association. \"First of all, I lowered my salary. I have to cut more.
And it\'s not pretty, what I\'m about to do to my employees\' working
conditions. I cried about it.\" \"Magazines are living organisms: they
live, they change, they die. I\'m not saying to keep things alive that
are no longer relevant. But here, we\'re talking about cuts to magazines
that are performing,\" like Lettres québécoises, Caribou, Nouveau
Projet, Liberté, Esse, the Revue d\'histoire de la Nouvelle-France,
whether in terms of notoriety or in terms of sales or number of
subscribers. \"Afterwards, when we react, the entire cultural
environment seems to be begging, all the time. While the problem is the
decision-makers who make incoherent decisions; who take one step forward
and two steps back.\" CULTURAL MAGAZINES

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1716

PAGES 20-21 The Republican candidate has pledged to appoint the boss of
X and Tesla to his government if he is elected. For political scientist
Asma Mhalla, a specialist in the geopolitics of tech, the ideological
power of this sector should not be underestimated. On September 4,
Donald Trump announced before the Economic Club of New York that he
would appoint Elon Musk to head a commission on \"government
effectiveness\" if he is elected president in the November election. The
boss of Tesla and the social network X immediately accepted the proposal
to \"serve America, without pay, title or recognition\". After
campaigning for the Republican candidate for weeks, Elon Musk is
therefore considering active participation in Donald Trump\'s
government. This raises many questions about the potential
instrumentalization of this network during the American campaign, the
perilous ideological rapprochement between this boss of \"Big Tech\" and
a candidate known for his use of insurrectional disinformation. This
finally reveals the beginning of a conservative revolution among Silicon
Valley leaders. Deciphering the technological and ideological stakes of
this alliance, with Asma Mhalla, political scientist specializing in the
geopolitics of tech and essayist, author of the recent book
Technopolitics: How Technologies Make Us Soldiers (Seuil, 2024). How do
you react to this rapprochement between Donald Trump and Elon Musk? It
doesn\'t surprise me at all. It is clear that Elon Musk has a lot to
gain from working closely with the American government, whether it is to
benefit from tax credits for Tesla, obtain NASA contracts for SpaceX, or
push for the reduction of regulation of social networks for X. Donald
Trump has promised to unravel the order of Joe Biden and Kamala Harris
which regulates the use of artificial intelligence, to launch a whole
bunch of mini \"Manhattan\" projects and develop military applications,
which could greatly interest Elon Musk and certain venture capitalists
from Silicon Valley, such as Andreessen Horowitz or Peter Thiel
\[co-founder of PayPal, boss of Palantir, editor\'s note\]. So, from
this point of view, we have an economic, geopolitical and ideological
convergence. Donald Trump, for his part, needs the image of Elon Musk:
with the withdrawal of Joe Biden from the presidential race and the
arrival of Kamala Harris, his running mate J.-D. Vance has proven to be
a bad casting, too conservative, which does not allow to broaden the
base. Elon Musk, with his image of an efficient boss who will slim down
the American state, and a guru for many, has much more resonance. In my
point of view, Trump has almost made him his shadow VP, the second vice
president. Is Donald Trump\'s proposal to appoint him to head this
commission to reduce public spending realistic? The United States has a
long tradition of bringing big bosses into governments, so it is not
surprising. But where it will be more complicated is that Elon Musk has
so many conflicts of interest between this mission and his own companies
that it is not certain that his nomination will be validated by
Congress. In any case, there will be a scandal. But with Trump, we can
expect anything. This alliance between the two men is quite symbolic and
goes beyond simple economic interests... DR Yes, it materializes the new
keys to the distribution of power and strength between Big Techs and
States. To put it simply, power is the vertical exercise of the function
from the top down to the population. Power is a relationship, a balance
of power between nations, it is projected. Large technology companies
are at the intersection of power and strength. It is therefore not
surprising that at a given moment, these two devices have converging
interests. To understand the hybridity of these new players, I speak in
my book of the "triptych of Big Techs": they are economic players
(choice of business models), technological players (design of platforms,
algorithms, etc.), but also political and sometimes ideological. It is
in particular this ideological aspect that emerges in this alliance
between Trump and Musk. There is a convergence around the project of the
new American ultraconservative right -- a bigoted, racist, supremacist
and neonatalist project promising a methodical unraveling of the federal
state, to which part of Silicon Valley has adhered, out of conviction or
opportunism. We know Donald Trump\'s ideas, a little less those of Elon
Musk. How do you define him ideologically? Many present him as a
\"libertarian\", a supporter of absolute freedom. I do not agree with
this term \"libertarian\". For me, Elon Musk is a right-wing anarchist
who has tragically radicalized towards the New Right. He sells himself
as a defender of the anti-system, and he has a real hatred of
traditional media and so all the work he does on X is to destroy the
intermediation. And thanks to this, and because of his own messages,
there is an exaggerated visibility of the content of far-right accounts
on X. But when we look in detail, his position is selective: a study,
released in May 2023, showed that X responded positively to 80% of
requests for moderation from authoritarian or techno-authoritarian
governments, such as Narendra Modi\'s India or Recep Tayyip Erdogan\'s
Turkey. He has, in fact, no problem with regulation or freedom of
speech, as long as it goes his way, promotes his business, or affects
his competitors. This outrageous aspect of Musk is growing visibly. Now
that Elon Musk is actively campaigning for Donald Trump, can he and his
social network influence the choice of voters? Has he already modified
X\'s algorithms in this direction? It is complicated to answer the
question of the algorithm, because despite Elon Musk\'s speech of
transparency and the open source publication of X\'s recommendation
algorithms, the update of this algorithm remains opaque. This is also
one of the issues of the European Digital Services Act. What is certain,
however, is that Elon Musk himself, with his millions of subscribers
\[197.3 million, editor\'s note\], is one of the main sounding boards
for the messages of the American far right. However, social media
algorithms mechanically amplify the most viral content, because they
generate the most \"engagement\", by playing on sad passions. This is
what Bernard Stiegler already called, speaking of television,
\"pulsional capitalism\". But in the end, we must put into perspective
the direct impact of these messages on the vote. First, because there is
an X bubble: not everyone is on this network. And especially because
even for those who are there, we don\'t know how these messages are
actually received. One of these messages can go viral, but some people
will repost it to denounce it, question it or comment on it, and that
will count as a sign of popularity. The downstream analysis of the
reception of the content is essential, as sociologist Dominique Cardon
rightly points out. Is there ultimately a difference between a Musk,
boss of a social network, who campaigns for a candidate, and the
directors of the New York Times or Fox News who do the same? A priori,
and only a priori, we could say that it is the same thing: the social
network is a new media. But in fact no, and for two reasons. On the one
hand, the editorial responsibility is not the same. Elon Musk asserts
his freedom of expression online, protected by the 1st Amendment in the
United States and Section 230 of the Communications Decency Act, passed
in 1996. This even allows him to spread disinformation, by publishing
photos of Kamala Harris in Stalinist garb, in the name of \"parody\".
Then, X is not just a social media: it is a public INTERVIEW
infrastructure, through which our sensitive personal data such as your
political opinion circulates. This data can be used by political parties
to target undecided voters, send them content and thus influence them
through emotional and cognitive manipulation. There is of course the
precedent of Cambridge Analytica, a perfect mix of Russian interference
and manipulation by Bannon\'s team in 2016. And again, this is being
taken very seriously: North Carolina and Michigan (two swing states,
held by Democrats) are closely investigating this to find out whether
the \"super PAC\", the fund supporting Donald Trump launched by Elon
Musk, was not at the same time collecting personal data that could allow
reprehensible political targeting practices. This would be serious.
Silicon Valley has traditionally been a breeding ground for Democrats
and progressives. Is Elon Musk an anomaly, or the symbol of a
conservative revolution in Big Tech? He is not an exception. The
majority of Silicon Valley collaborators still support the Democrats,
but among some ultra-influential beachheads, there is a growing movement
in support of Donald Trump, for economic and ideological reasons, in the
same way as Elon Musk. These are Peter Thiel, David Sacks, Marc
Andreessen and Ben Horowitz, or the boss of Sequoia Capital, Shaun
Maguire. They want to do business, of course, but they also claim to be
part of an "anti-woke" movement, and they want to put their money at the
service of a certain political agenda. They are opinion leaders and
multi-billionaires who design or finance strategic infrastructures, such
as civil and sometimes military artificial intelligence. If Donald Trump
wins, can we expect a change in policy on new technologies? I don't
think so. Foreign technology policy should be the same regardless of the
color of the administration. And we could see, during the debate on
Tuesday evening between Donald Trump and Kamala Harris, that this
question did not divide the two candidates. The question of the
projection of technological power is politically agnostic. Joe Biden has
already had the same approach as Donald Trump, or even strengthened what
Donald Trump had done, that is to say, trying to slow down China\'s
development in the field of AI via semiconductors to remain the world\'s
leading power in the field, as well as asking allies, therefore in fact
Europe, to be less severe with regard to American Big Techs. For
example, it would be difficult to imagine that Elon Musk would one day
be arrested like Pavel Durov, the boss of Telegram. \"Big technology
companies are at the intersection of power and power. It is therefore
not surprising that at a given moment, these two devices have converging
interests.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1717

On the dangers of AI, is France in denial? \"This theme was at the heart
of the press conference organized by the Pause IA association, Tuesday,
September 10, in Paris. The prospect of holding an international summit
on artificial intelligence (AI) in the French capital, on February 10
and 11, 2025, is sparking a mobilization of activists most concerned
about the \"security of AI\", who feel they are not being heard. French
officials are \"too optimistic\", accuses the president of the French
branch of Pause IA, Maxime Fournes, a former AI engineer in finance. In
a \"counter-expertise\" published on Tuesday, Pause IA criticizes the AI
Commission\'s report submitted to the government in March for \"ignoring
the warnings of many experts regarding the existential risks\" of AI,
which \"could lead to the extinction of humanity or to catastrophic
damage\", through \"the creation of uncontrollable AI or AI misaligned
with human values\" or \"malicious use to design biological weapons or
devastating cyberattacks\". According to the association, Emmanuel
Macron and the commission rely too much on the advice of representatives
of AI companies, such as Yann LeCun of Meta (Facebook), Arthur Mensch of
Mistral AI, or Cédric O, former Secretary of State who became an advisor
and shareholder of Mistral -- the latter was accused of a conflict of
interest, but the High Authority for Transparency in Public Life stated
in June that "there is no evidence to suggest" that the reservations
expressed about his move to the private sector had been ignored. Putting
AI on "pause" An international organization created in 2023 by a Dutch
engineer, Pause IA organized small demonstrations in May (fewer than ten
participants in Paris) to demand an international treaty suspending
research into the most advanced AIs. It is in line with the spirit of
the major petitions launched in 2023 to put AI on "pause" or to make
"extinction risks" a priority, "like pandemics or nuclear war". These
are very present themes at the AI security summit in London, in November
2023. The Future of Life Institute (FLI), the American think tank behind
the petition for a "pause", has appointed a representative to Paris and
is organising a series of "AI security breakfasts" there. "The Paris
summit seeks to shift the focus away from security" and "AI is seen as a
vehicle for economic nationalism", deplored in July the guest Stuart
Russell, an American researcher who pioneered the denunciation of the
"existential risks" of AI. "There is a decline in the theme of AI
security everywhere, but France wins the prize", believes Connor Leahy,
from the start-up ConjectureAI, present in London. At a time when we are
wondering about an AI \"bubble\" and the limits of its uses, these
speeches are less influential than they were a few months ago. In
addition, AI ethics researchers, such as the AI Now Institute, warn that
worrying about the hypothetical risks of a fantasized and quasi-divine
superintelligence is dangerous, because it distracts from the more
immediate risks of AI, such as errors, biases, misinformation or the
impact on the environment and employment (even if Pause IA or FLI say
they are also concerned about non-existential risks). For Messrs. LeCun
and Mensch, stirring up exaggerated fears leads to limiting a beneficial
technology to a handful of large companies, by restricting its
publication in open source, freely accessible. Mr. Macron hammers home
his desire to bring out \"AI champions\" in France, even if it means
limiting regulation. Special envoy for the organization of the summit
and former co-president of the AI Commission, Anne Bouverot assumes the
change of direction of Paris compared to London: \"Security will of
course remain a subject - in one of the five parts, devoted to trusted
AI - but it will not be the only subject. It is appropriate to look at
the fascinating risks such as existential risks but also other very real
risks, such as the transformation of professions, the concentration of
the sector in the hands of a few players in a few countries or the
impact on the climate.\" Advocating \"AI for the general interest\", the
organizer assures that she makes sure to speak to everyone, including
\"civil society\".

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1718

He joined AWS as an intern in 2005, at a time when Amazon was preparing
to launch this new branch of activity: an infrastructure concept called
\"cloud\", which would revolutionize IT. Eighteen years later, Matt
Garman is at the helm of this subsidiary which contributes 60% of the
American giant\'s operating profit, after the surprise departure of his
predecessor, Adam Selipsky, announced in May. Between the two, this
engineer by training held many positions in the company, including that
of vice president of global sales and marketing. \"Thanks to the
combination of all these points of view, I acquired a good experience of
the difficulties encountered by customers, their expectations, as well
as the possibilities available to us to continue to innovate\", confided
the manager to Le Figaro. This change at the head of the world leader in
cloud computing comes at a pivotal moment for this industry, in full
swing since the sensational arrival of generative artificial
intelligence. "Generative AI is one of those rare technological changes
that has the potential to revolutionize both the way we work and the
business models of many companies. We are only at the beginning, but I
truly believe that it will transform absolutely every industry." "A huge
boost" These new technologies are already significantly accelerating
demand for the cloud, as shown by the growth rates of AWS's business in
recent quarters. On the one hand, start-ups developing large language
models, in the wake of OpenAI, require computing power that only the
cloud can provide. On the other, to exploit the full potential of these
models, companies need to centralize all the wealth of their data and
access it securely, simply, flexibly and quickly. "The data and the
intellectual property that they will bring to generative AI in order to
improve their business will be the differentiator for companies. This is
one of the things that is accelerating cloud adoption. So this is a huge
boost for AWS's business," says its CEO. He has seen the expectations of
business leaders change. "Before, their concerns were mainly about
economics and everyone's priority was very much focused on reducing
costs or, for those already operating in the cloud, reducing their
environmental footprint. From the moment ChatGPT was launched, almost
every conversation quickly shifted to how their company should think
about generative AI." However, only about 15% of enterprise data flows
are in the cloud today globally, which offers great growth prospects for
all providers\... "This is an important time for the cloud industry. We
feel the urgency to move quickly, to continue to innovate for our
customers, to expand globally and to build new capabilities." In recent
months, AWS has been increasing its investments to several tens of
billions of dollars to build more data centers around the world. The
latest: the United Kingdom, which will benefit from a plan of 9.5
billion euros over five years. In the spring, the Amazon subsidiary
announced 18 billion euros in Germany, nearly 16 billion in Spain as
well as several projects in the Asia-Pacific region. \"We want AWS to be
the engine of global innovation in the field of AI for all its
customers. Realizing this vision requires rapidly expanding our
infrastructure, innovating ourselves both in terms of chips and in terms
of services and capabilities, and that is what we are doing.\" The new
CEO wants to accelerate a different strategy from that of its rival
Microsoft, which has bet heavily on the company OpenAI. Bedrock, AWS's
enterprise AI platform, has chosen from the start to offer, among other
things, the widest possible choice of language models, including open
source ones. "The fundamentals that customers care about don't change:
they want to make sure their applications and data are secure, that
there's no leak. So we took some time to build a really robust platform,
as well as services that we think could help customers build
applications using generative AI that really add value, as opposed to
flashy marketing efforts that don't have a lot of substance." AWS also
invested \$4 billion in Anthropic, a rival startup to OpenAI that
developed the Claude family of large language models that will soon
power Amazon's Alexa voice assistant. "Anthropic is a key part of our
proposition, but it's just one part of it." We appreciate their team and
we thought it was a good investment for us,\" he comments. European
\"sovereign cloud\" from Germany For several months, some observers have
been worried about a possible \"bubble\" around these new technologies,
given the investment amounts that may seem disproportionate compared to
the hopes of monetization. \"It\'s true that training these models is
expensive and requires a massive investment that only a few players can
afford,\" the manager acknowledges. It\'s a gamble. There\'s a chance
that it won\'t pay off, but the potential is so great that I think
there\'s a good chance that it will. On the other hand, in the field of
inference (the use of generative AI by companies, editor\'s note), I
think it\'s a time problem. The cost of inference has already fallen
more than a hundredfold in the last two years, and I think it will
continue to fall rapidly as we develop new techniques, new processors,
smaller but more capable designs. And as inference becomes cheaper, it
will open up more use cases." Another big concern is energy. Generative
AI technologies are extremely energy-intensive, and for the big cloud
providers, securing supply is becoming a priority. "Making sure we have
enough energy, and renewable energy, to meet the demands of AI is
becoming a real challenge," admits Matt Garman. In March, Amazon bought
a campus directly powered by a nuclear power plant in Pennsylvania from
US energy provider Talen Energy in order to build a massive data center
there. Will we see more of this in the future? "I can't predict whether
we're going to see more or not, but I think so. The pace at which many
energy companies can build new wind and solar is probably not enough to
meet the demand for energy. Until the promise of small modular reactors
comes, we will continue to invest in existing nuclear projects that make
sense for us, while also investing in other renewable energy projects."
By the end of 2025, AWS will also launch its European "sovereign cloud"
offering from Germany, with an investment of €7.8 billion. Unlike
France's requirements for sovereignty over certain critical state and
corporate data, Germany does not impose a legal criterion, namely that
the company operating the infrastructure must be majority-owned by an EU
player. "It's been easier to work with the regulatory environments in
other countries," acknowledges Matt Garman. AWS did not want to go
through joint ventures with French companies, as Microsoft and Google
Cloud did. \"We want customers to be able to comply with all the
regulations of the country in which they operate without having to give
up all the capabilities they are entitled to expect. And if we cannot do
both, we prefer to work longer to find a solution,\" the manager
concludes. IV

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1719

Judge Mellor of the High Court in London is not in the habit of handing
down his decisions as soon as the hearings are over. Usually, he is more
of the type to take the time to think. But on March 14, he seems in a
hurry to get it over with. It must be said that the defendant before
him, an Australian engineer, Craig Wright, lied to the court for six
weeks and produced false documents. In the eyes of the magistrate, there
is no doubt: this 53-year-old man cannot claim to be the inventor of
bitcoin, known under the pseudonym Satoshi Nakamoto. The Cryptocurrency
Open Patent Alliance (COPA), an association of cryptocurrency
professionals, was therefore right to see him as an impostor and to
initiate proceedings against him. \"The evidence is overwhelming,\" the
judge said. Wright is not the person who operated under the pseudonym
Satoshi Nakamoto. Wright is not the person who created bitcoin. » In the
process, COPA hastened to hail a \"definitive victory for the truth.\"
The \"truth\"? Not quite, though\... Because, while Wright\'s name has
been erased from history, the true identity of Satoshi Nakamoto remains
unknown, to the point of constituting one of the greatest mysteries of
the Internet era: who is he, this inventor of bitcoin? He has not given
any sign of life for thirteen years; thirteen years that the enigma has
given rise to countless theories, that \"crypto\" enthusiasts - a whole
small world of insiders - have been tracking down the slightest clues to
try to uncover his secret. \"I would be so happy, joyful, excited, to
know who it is! I have a veneration for Nakamoto,\" enthuses Manuel
Proquin, a blockchain enthusiast, the technology at the base of bitcoin.
This spring evening, in a bar in downtown Nantes, this engineer by
training joined about twenty other crypto enthusiasts, brought together
by Blockchain et Société, an association whose goal is to bring together
local players in the sector and introduce their world to the public.
Even if the identification of \"Satoshi\", as they call him among
themselves, is not their main concern, they all admire this tutelary
figure, who was able to overcome the technical obstacles to the creation
of a digital currency in 2009. Manuel Proquin praises his \"intellectual
prowess\", his \"vision of the world, which protects humanity in its
fundamental rights\" and, above all, his \"ability to disappear, in a
society in perpetual search of glory\". In this Nantes bar, as
everywhere else among crypto enthusiasts, everyone has their hypothesis
on the Satoshi myth. \"I would like it to actually be a group of
women,\" says Manuel Proquin, \"it would be a middle finger to our
prejudices. » Another member of the troupe, Jonathan Le Brun, a
blockchain developer, dares a theory that he himself considers
\"crazy\": \"Maybe it\'s some kind of time traveler who brought us
bitcoin to prevent a collapse of our society.\" Another developer,
Vianney Charpentier, implores: \"Please Satoshi, stay hidden! It\'s all
well and good to talk about him as a legend, but that\'s all.\" To
measure the extent of the mystery, we have to go back to the beginning,
October 31, 2008. On that day, a certain Satoshi Nakamoto, unknown to
cryptography enthusiasts, appeared on a discussion space bringing
together, on the Internet, people interested in topics related to the
protection of privacy, the confidentiality of messages and data
encryption. This community brings together, among others,
\"cypherpunks\", fierce defenders of digital freedoms, advocating the
development of technologies guaranteeing the anonymity of Internet
users. Although his name sounds Japanese, there is no evidence that
Satoshi Nakamoto actually comes from that country. The only certainty is
that in his very first message, he published a link to a nine-page
document entitled \"Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Payment System\".
Since then, nicknamed the \"Bitcoin White Paper\", it is in some ways
the birth certificate of this cryptocurrency. Last cryptic message At
the time, the community had been struggling for years to create such an
unforgeable means of payment. And suddenly, this Satoshi Nakamoto who
came from nowhere came up with a solution\... \"He aggregated
technologies, all of which more or less already existed, but which had
never been interwoven in such a way as to create a functional
decentralized currency system\", Primavera De Filippi, research director
at the CNRS and specialist in blockchain legal issues, explained to Le
Monde. Who is this stranger? It is impossible to know: he does not
provide any information, neither his nationality nor his age, and is
content to summarize, in this initial message, the \"main properties\"
of bitcoin. Suffice to say that the reception is measured, at least at
first\... The article nevertheless manages to attract the attention of
Hal Finney, an American encryption specialist, with whom Satoshi
Nakamoto begins to collaborate remotely. Finney will thus be the
recipient, on January 12, 2009, of the very first transaction in
bitcoins. Even if this currency then represents nothing, Satoshi
Nakamoto strives to keep his identity secret. He leaves no clues behind
him: his conversations, public or private, in impeccable English, are
exclusively devoted to the bitcoin project. If his correspondents and
online collaborators, increasingly numerous over the months, ask
personal questions, he evades them. When an anonymous donor offers him
\$2,000 (€1,800) in cash to help with operating costs, he asks one of
the community\'s most active members and one of his first collaborators,
Martti Malmi, to receive them in his place. He has no intention of
revealing an address. This man, if he is a man, is a ghost, a master of
camouflage. His profile is starting to take shape, however. His distrust
of banking institutions can be guessed. Without really knowing whether
it is a coincidence or a pointed wink, the very first bitcoin
transaction block, for example, refers in its code to the front page of
the Times of the day, January 3, 2009, devoted to the rescue of banks
after the subprime crisis. In one of his messages, Satoshi Nakamoto
writes that \"from a libertarian point of view,\" the idea of bitcoin is
interesting. Could he also be a \"libertarian\", in other words a
supporter of maximum individual freedom and minimal state intervention?
Overall, however, he remains cautious about his commitments. Thus, when
a member of the small bitcoin community suggests presenting bitcoin as a
currency \"out of reach of governments\", Satoshi Nakamoto retorts:
\"There is no way I would make such a provocation or assertion.\" In
another exchange, he also refuses the mention \"consider it as an
investment\": \"It is dangerous to say that (\...) , he believes. No
problem if people come to this conclusion themselves, but we cannot
present it like that.\" At the very beginning of the 2010s, Satoshi
Nakamoto knows that he is walking a ridge line, on the border of
legality. When WikiLeaks, a young site that had just published thousands
of confidential documents from the American army, was deprived of access
to donations by MasterCard, Visa, Bank of America or PayPal, Satoshi
Nakamoto opposed the idea of using bitcoin to support its founders. He
did not want this whiff of scandal to draw attention to what was still,
in his eyes, a fragile project. But it was too late, the debate had
begun. The specialist press was timidly beginning to take an interest in
bitcoin. The emergence of Silk Road, a drug supermarket on the dark Web,
would help popularize it, by allowing it to be used to supply itself
with prohibited products. From then on, the general press also took up
the subject. Result: in 2011, the price of bitcoin jumped from 30 cents
to almost 30 dollars. And Satoshi Nakamoto will disappear\... While his
interventions become rarer, he sends, in May 2011, a last message to
Martti Malmi: \"I have moved on,\" he announces. I will probably not be
around in the future.\" Since this sibylline message, he has not given
any sign of life, leaving behind a colossal fortune. According to
estimates, he owns between 700,000 and 1.1 million bitcoins, which
represents, at the time of writing, a value of 35 billion to 55 billion
euros\... A jackpot that he has never touched. Why disappear like this?
Speculation is rife. What if he had been struck by illness or death? Did
he fear legal proceedings? No matter the reasons: many have tried,
despite his wishes, to unmask him\... The \"Newsweek\" fiasco On March
6, 2014, the American magazine Newsweek dedicated its \"front page\" to
Satoshi Nakamoto, claiming to have discovered the man behind the
pseudonym. According to Newsweek, he was a retired engineer, a certain
Dorian Nakamoto, the birth name of \"Satoshi Nakamoto\", living in
California, known for having worked on classified projects in the past.
As he refused to answer the emails of the magazine\'s journalist in
charge of the investigation, she went to his door, which he only opened
a crack. To the question: \"Did you create bitcoin, sir?\" he replied:
\"I have nothing more to do with it and I don\'t want to talk about
it.\" \"I have nothing more to do with it\"\... That was all it took to
convince Newsweek to publish the article. Immediately, journalists rush
to the home of the supposed Satoshi Nakamoto, who only agrees to leave
to get into the car of an Associated Press (AP) reporter, who is
immediately chased by the rest of the swarm. Meanwhile, on the Internet,
panic reigns. As the hours go by, skepticism sets in. Internet users
compare the writing styles of the two Nakamotos: nothing in common.
Gavin Andresen, one of the first contributors to the bitcoin project,
attacks the journalist, writing that her only \"proof\" was the quote
from the retiree. \"But he could just be an old man who will say
anything to get rid of you,\" he says. In fact, this is indeed the case:
during the day, AP releases a video in which the man designated by
Newsweek denies being the inventor of bitcoin - which he also mistakenly
calls \"bitcon\". A few days later, on March 25, 2014, another magazine,
Forbes, believed this time to have found a serious candidate: Hal
Finney, Satoshi Nakamoto\'s first collaborator, who, by a surprising
coincidence, lived a few blocks from the other Nakamoto. Suffering from
Lou Gehrig\'s disease, Hal Finney had gradually disappeared from
discussions, at the same rate as the inventor of bitcoin, the elusive
Satoshi Nakamoto. Finney would die a few weeks after the publication of
Forbes, to whom he had also denied being Nakamoto. In accordance with
his wishes, he was cryogenically frozen, in the hope of one day being
resuscitated. Another American journalist, Nathaniel Popper of the New
York Times, devoted a book to the origins of cryptocurrency: Digital
Gold. The Untold Story of Bitcoin (Penguin, 2015). \"When I started
writing it, I assumed that I would not find the identity of Satoshi
Nakamoto,\" he confided to Le Monde. \"And, at the same time, every time
I spoke to someone involved in the early days of bitcoin, I couldn\'t
help but ask them what they thought about it\...\" Over the course of
the meetings, a hypothesis emerged: that of an American in his fifties
at the time, Nick Szabo, already identified in 2013 by a blogger who had
spotted certain clues. Beyond the concordance of vocabulary and
initials, Nick Szabo, a secretive and reserved character, was already
passionate, well before the invention of bitcoin, about digital currency
projects. In 1998, he had laid the theoretical foundations of \"bit
gold\", a sort of ancestor of bitcoin. A few months before the release
of Satoshi Nakamoto's famous "White Paper," he had expressed on his blog
his intention to put it into practice and was looking for help to make
his project a reality. Surprisingly, after Satoshi Nakamoto and his
revolutionary concept emerged in October 2008, Nick Szabo did not
respond. Another surprising fact: on the Internet, he changed the
publication dates of several of his messages about bit gold, so that
they appeared to have been posted online after the appearance of
bitcoin. Add to that "cheap clothes and a modest attitude" and you have,
as Nathaniel Popper wrote in the New York Times in May 2015, "the kind
of person who could have a fortune without spending a dime --- or even
throw away the keys to the safe. People who know him say he drives a car
from the 1990s." Despite the suspicions, Nick Szabo denied it, orally
and then in writing, reports the same Nathaniel Popper: \"I\'m going to
say it, hoping to set the record straight once and for all: I\'m not
Satoshi!\" This clarification, made at a gathering dedicated to bitcoin
in 2014, did not extinguish the suspicions of the New York Times
journalist. \"For me, he\'s still the best candidate,\" he insists.
\"Even if I wouldn\'t bet my life that it\'s him.\" Reporters, Internet
users, crypto specialists\... All have gotten involved in recent years,
analyzing every word, every trace left by \"Satoshi.\" The results have
not yielded anything very coherent: examining the times his messages
were published could suggest, according to some, an American location,
but his vocabulary rather resembles that of a British person. Many names
have therefore been circulating, such as those of certain pioneers of
bitcoin or cryptocurrencies (Gavin Andresen, Adam Back, David Chaum).
More eccentric theories have cited the multi-billionaire businessman
Elon Musk or mentioned a secret project of the NSA, the American
National Security Agency. None of them are unanimous. While the main
names mentioned are American, shouldn\'t we rather dig into the European
side? After all, besides the fact that his English is more British than
American, another clue suggests that Satoshi Nakamoto may have lived on
this side of the Atlantic: one of the e-mail services he used, GMX, is
German. Jean-Jacques Quisquater, a cryptologist at the Catholic
University of Louvain, in Belgium, is one of those interested in this
lead. This septuagenarian is a reference in his discipline and has been
speaking at all the major specialist conferences since the 1980s.
"Looking back, I realize that I met almost everyone who participated in
the development of bitcoin," he told Le Monde. Maybe even, who knows,
Satoshi Nakamoto himself... For years, Jean-Jacques Quisquater has been
trying to unmask the latter. This quest obsesses him all the more
because he himself played, indirectly and unknowingly, a role in the
history of bitcoin. One of his research articles, dated 1999, is in fact
cited in the \"White Paper\" distributed by \"Satoshi\". \"When I
discovered this, I asked myself a lot of questions\", confides the
Belgian researcher. And for good reason: his article had not circulated
much, what\'s more in a preparatory version, and had only been presented
at a small conference bringing together forty or so European
specialists. \"How is it possible that this guy knows this paper?\" In
other words, was he attending the conference? The use of stylometry
Since then, Jean-Jacques Quisquater has dug up his archives in search of
possible leads, dissected the \"White Paper\" in the hope of detecting a
hidden message, and even used stylometry to analyze Satoshi Nakamoto\'s
writing style and identify possible correspondences with that of the
various \"suspects\". Recently, he studied the list of conference
participants in detail. \"I didn\'t find anything abnormal there,\" he
despairs. \"Maybe they hadn\'t written their names\...\" There is one
name that the Belgian researcher would have liked to find there, to
reinforce one of his favorite hypotheses about Satoshi Nakamoto\'s
identity: that of Len Sassaman, an American living in Belgium, a
researcher at the Cosic laboratory in Louvain, specializing in computer
security and cryptography. \"He beats the record for coincidences,\"
says Jean-Jacques Quisquater. He is the one who, of all, can most likely
know this article, because copies were there, at the university.\" Other
elements reinforce, according to him, the Len Sassaman hypothesis.
Didn\'t the latter collaborate with Hal Finney, but also with David
Chaum and Adam Back? Passionate about cryptocurrencies, frequenting the
same discussion spaces as Satoshi Nakamoto, Sassaman was \"extremely
intelligent, capable of writing the bitcoin program\", according to
Jean-Jacques Quisquater. \"He demonstrated all the qualities to do that.
But he is no longer here to talk about it.\" Len Sassaman committed
suicide at the age of 31, in 2011. Two months after the
\"disappearance\" of Satoshi Nakamoto. Len Sassaman\'s partner wanted to
put an end to the speculation. \"He used FileVault\", a file protection
system, she wrote on Twitter after her partner\'s death. \"I don\'t know
his password. No matter how much you want to know if he was Satoshi, I
can\'t get into his computer. That door is closed.\" Since then, the
bitcoin community has paid tribute to Len Sassaman, by engraving a
tribute to him in the blockchain. Jean-Jacques Quisquater also explored
a Japanese lead and spotted a certain Masashi Une. This graduate in
experimental economics, a specialist in cryptography and finance, who
worked for the Bank of Japan, is the author of a report in 2001,
compatible with the skills of a Satoshi Nakamoto. He also cites
Jean-Jacques Quisquater\'s article, which also appears in Satoshi
Nakamoto\'s \"White Paper\". \"This report is very disturbing to me, and
no one talks about it!\", continues the researcher. Masashi Une also
worked with an engineer who is also a specialist in cryptography,
Tsutomu Matsumoto. And the Belgian researcher noted the similarities
between the first name of the first, Masashi, the last name of the
second, Matsumoto, and the pseudonym of the enigmatic inventor of
bitcoin. \"Over time, you start to see strange things,\" he admits. In
response to questions from Le Monde, Masashi Une responded bluntly by
email: \"The answer is NO. I am not Satoshi Nakamoto.\" \"Unbelievable\"
Still according to Jean-Jacques Quisquater, the most likely hypothesis
remains that of the group, to which Len Sassaman could have belonged, as
well as other people previously cited. \"It is almost improbable that
Satoshi Nakamoto wrote his article alone, without making any mistakes,\"
assures Mr. Quisquater. This paper is impeccable, which is very rare. It
probably results from a discussion with others, who were able to at
least reread the article, and perhaps provide funding. » Fifteen years
after the first bitcoin was issued, and while so many leads have been
explored, will the truth ever be discovered? The Belgian researcher
wants to believe that one or other of the members of the group -- if it
is a group -- will at least leave behind a document that will help lift
the veil on this mystery. Nathaniel Popper, the journalist for the New
York Times, is less optimistic: \"I tend to think that if we still
haven\'t found it, we won\'t succeed. But you never know. Artificial
intelligence could make it possible to link data in an original way. And
it\'s not impossible that relatives of people involved in the project
will decide at some point to speak out.\" Especially since new elements
have recently emerged. As part of the Craig Wright trial in London,
Martti Malmi and Adam Back had to make public their correspondence with
Satoshi Nakamoto, which Internet users pounced on in the hope of finding
new leads. To no avail. After all, wouldn\'t it be better to respect
Nakamoto\'s wish for anonymity? Many members of the \"crypto\" community
are convinced of this. Their fear? That he will be prosecuted. \"He
created a system that, despite all the legal uses, is also widely used
for illicit uses,\" notes Ms. De Filippi. This raises a lot of
questions: can the person who developed the program be held responsible
for the illicit uses?\" In fact, precedents exist in the first attempts
to create digital currency. Douglas Jackson, \"father\" of e-gold in
1996, was for example convicted in 2009 by the American courts for money
laundering. Except that, unlike e-gold, bitcoin is open source, meaning
that many contributors participate in its development. \"Can we then
consider all contributors responsible for malicious uses?\" asks Ms. De
Filippi. According to him, the legal outcome would remain uncertain if
Satoshi Nakamoto were unmasked and prosecuted. Beyond this legal
dimension, many crypto enthusiasts see another advantage in the
persistence of the Nakamoto mystery. Many of them, including some we met
in Nantes, believe that anonymity also preserves the project and the
community. \"The fact that there is no one behind bitcoin gives it
extraordinary strength,\" says Manuel Proquin. \"You can\'t take it
down, because there are no heads to roll.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1720

Clément Delangue is, with Julien Chaumond and Thomas Wolfe, one of the
three French co-founders of Hugging Face, a leading artificial
intelligence (AI) start-up. Valued at €4.2 billion after raising nearly
€450 million since its creation in 2016, this American company is known
as the reference platform where developers and companies publish tools
and models for making AI in open source, that is to say freely
accessible and modifiable. Living between Miami, New York and Paris,
where half of Hugging Face\'s 220 employees are based, its CEO defends
the design of an \"open and decentralized\" AI, against the domination
of digital giants like OpenAI and its partner Microsoft or Google.
Hugging Face wants to \"democratize good AI\", what does that mean? An
AI is ethical when it is aligned with the values of the individuals who
participate in the project. At Hugging Face, our values are openness,
transparency, and inclusiveness. So we think about ways to make the
technology as open as possible, to allow companies to share their AI
models and the datasets and content on which they have been trained. We
also seek to prevent one company from controlling the sector. We would
like everyone to be able to create their own AI: companies, but also
associations and NGOs, public structures, regulators, etc. Powerful
players like Google or OpenAI offer large closed AI models, why is that
a problem? There are several complementary approaches. When you want to
make a search engine, like ChatGPT, it is good to use a very large AI
model. But when you want to create a chatbot -- a conversational robot
-- for customer service for your banking application, you don\'t need an
AI that talks about the meaning of life, but rather an AI that answers
you quickly. A smaller, more specialized model is faster and costs less
money and electricity, and therefore emits less CO2. Also, it is
important that all the people who want to build AI systems have access
to the resources they need, just as anyone can write computer code to
create software. This is a more desirable world than one where a few big
companies keep their secrets and their models, and control access to
this technology. What is the alternative, open source mini-models that
run on people\'s computers at home? Yes, these are many different
models, that all organizations can create and modify, and that solve all
the tasks of daily life. We are currently working on robotics. For
example, we trained a \$600 robot \[540 euros\], equipped with iPhone
cameras, to fold T-shirts, and then published the data so that others
can run their experiments. I am much more excited by a world where
everyone can have little robots, which they can train to do the tasks of
their choice, than by the idea of a big company that creates a big
robot, which you do not control and which it sends to your home to do
all kinds of things. We prefer a somewhat decentralized future where
everyone does AI. Can you give some examples of uses? The use cases are
very variable, it is hard to predict them. We already use AI without
realizing it: when we watch the news, in the algorithms that recommend
content to us; when we take a VTC, in the prediction of the arrival
time... We use software everywhere. And in a few years, all software
will be built with AI. Aren\'t AI start-ups dependent on the digital
giants, who provide them with the computing necessary for the
functioning of their models and who have acquired capital in OpenAI,
Anthropic or Hugging Face? There are natural tendencies towards
concentration in the AI sector that are stronger than in traditional
software. We need to combat them all the more. We try to do this by
providing open source tools. We have 5 million users, the majority of
whom do not work for Big Tech. As for Hugging Face, in our last funding
round, in August 2023, we raised part of the funds from them \[Google,
Amazon, AMD, Intel, IBM or Nvidia\], but we decided to do it from all of
them, rather than just one. This avoids exclusivity. What is the
financial situation of the company? We are trying to create a model that
allows us to remain fairly independent. We are profitable in the last
quarter. This is quite exceptional for an AI start-up, although it
fluctuates, when we invest. Similarly, we still have in the bank the
majority of the \$500 million of capital raised over seven years. Often,
AI startups spend a lot and can survive one to two years without raising
funds. And that\'s why there are cases like Adept AI, Inflection AI or
Character AI \[whose leaders were hired by Amazon, Microsoft and
Google\]. This year, we\'re going to see more attention paid to the
profitability of AI startups. Right now, ten of them contact me every
week to be acquired. Hugging Face helps companies adapt AI models, but
how do you compete with consulting giants like Capgemini, or cloud
giants like Microsoft, Google or Amazon? Our model is freemium \[from
the English free, free, and premium, with added value\]. Most uses are
free but a small percentage are paid. We are used by more than a
thousand companies, including Bloomberg or Nvidia. These need additional
features, for security or the management of their many users. And also
assistance in choosing and using our tools. Or, finally, infrastructure
\[online services in the cloud, such as computing\] to run AI models.
The advantage \[compared to buying this computing directly from cloud
providers like Amazon or Google\] is that our solutions are very
integrated with our platform and specialized in AI. By optimizing
specialized models, you can reduce the price of a task done with AI, for
example from 10 to 1 euro cent. GitHub, the leading open source platform
in software, was bought by Microsoft in 2018. Could that happen to you?
That\'s not the goal. We think we can create an independent platform on
AI. Can\'t open source be used by giants to dominate a market, as Google
did with Android, and as Meta could do with its AI models? This hinders
start-ups that sell their proprietary models\... Yes and no. In the
United States, the competition authority concluded that open source AI
promotes competition, even if it can benefit the big players. This
contributes to democratization. It is important that open source is not
only practiced by digital giants, but also by start-ups, universities
and non-profit organizations. We must also maintain a bit of rigor on
the definition of open source: this involves publishing the model, but
also the training datasets and offering very permissive licenses. In the
European regulation on AI, the AI Act, are you in favor of the
obligation to provide a summary of the texts or images used to train
them, which allows the owners of this content to request payment? Yes, I
am rather in favor of this idea. Similarly, on the label of a product,
you can see the ingredients... We must first be transparent about the
list of actors who participated in the creation of a system. Then
appropriate remuneration models. The best has not really been found yet.
I am sometimes a little afraid of the training data licensing contracts
\[for example between OpenAI and the media groups Associated Press,
Springer, Financial Times or Le Monde\]. If a few big players sign
agreements with all the media that prevent others from creating
competing AI models, we will be in a delicate situation. We could take
into account the end use of the data: if you train an open source model
that benefits research and education, you might not be required to pay a
license. Whereas if your AI system competes with the activity of the
creators of this data, it is normal that you pay them. You say that you
raised most of the funds from Americans because the Europeans could not
invest enough. Has the European ecosystem strengthened since then? It is
really important that more and more local, national AI emerges. And
therefore that all countries support their ecosystem. Because this
fundamental technology can have a big impact on the economy. If all the
reference AI models are American, US companies will have a competitive
advantage. This is a question of sovereignty and competitiveness. On the
problems posed by AI -- errors, disinformation, moderation of hateful
content, discriminatory biases -- does open source change anything? For
many of the existing problems of AI, open source can be a solution.
Because proprietary models are black boxes. This makes it difficult to
analyze biases or detect content generated by AI on social networks. It
is difficult to know what you are eating if you do not have the list of
ingredients or the recipe...

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1721

After Europe, California also intends to play the pioneer role in
regulating artificial intelligence (AI). Six months after the vote on
the Artificial Intelligence Act in Brussels, a bill that also aims to
limit the risks associated with this technology could be adopted in this
West Coast state. After being voted on last month by both Houses, the
text is awaiting the green light from the Governor of California to come
into force on January 1, 2026. Gavin Newsom has until the end of
September to sign it\... or veto it. Since the launch of ChatGPT, almost
two years ago, the craze around generative AI and the race between tech
giants have intensified discussions around the need to regulate this
industry. Most Silicon Valley executives have themselves advocated for
regulation. Including Sam Altman, the head of OpenAI, the parent company
of ChatGPT, who testified before Congress last year and proposed that
the government create a dedicated agency. But Washington has failed to
get Democrats and Republicans to agree on national AI legislation.
Preventing "catastrophic" risks With this text called "SB 1047",
California hopes to be one step ahead of the federal state. Its
initiator, Democratic senator Scott Wiener, believes that it is time to
legislate before advances in AI become too difficult to control. The
objective of the text is to protect populations against "catastrophic"
risks, such as cyberattacks or the development of biological weapons. If
passed, this bill would require AI developers to test their technology
before selling it. The text would require them to use service providers
to conduct annual audits. The goal: to assess their procedures in terms
of security or protection of whistleblowers who denounce abuses. In the
event of a violation of the text, these companies could be sued by the
California attorney general. This bill would only apply to companies
developing large AI models or the most expensive to train (more than
\$100 million), not to start-ups. The issue is not to penalize the
latter in the face of Big Tech, insists Scott Wiener. He insists that
the goal is to make their practices more responsible. A way to
strengthen the trust of the general public. Despite a series of
amendments that have helped to soften the text, it deeply divides
Silicon Valley and the political class. Many figures in the Democratic
Party, including Representative Nancy Pelosi, are against it. This would
amount to punishing companies for the actions of their customers, some
critics rage. Others are wary of the prospect of a single state having
such prerogatives over a nascent technology. Many tech executives and
investors say too much control could stifle innovation and put the
United States at a disadvantage compared to other, more liberal
countries. A powerful lobbying campaign was waged before the vote in
both houses, and a website was set up to gather the views of opponents
of the bill and urge lawmakers to vote against it. Heavy-handed
regulation Tech heavyweights have also weighed in. Elon Musk, who has
long warned about the risks of AI, has publicly committed to the bill.
Dario Amodei, the CEO of Anthropic, who initially opposed the bill,
believes its benefits now outweigh its negatives. But companies like
Meta and Google have spoken out about their negatives. "This bill makes
a fundamental mistake by regulating AI technology rather than its
applications," tweeted Andrew Ng, an AI startup CEO who has previously
led AI teams at Google and Baidu. Like him, Frenchman Yann LeCun, a
renowned researcher and director of AI research at Meta, believes the
bill risks stifling the availability of open-source models. "Regulating
the deployment of AI applications is a good thing. But regulating R&D
would have apocalyptic consequences for the AI ecosystem," he tweeted
earlier this summer. KL

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1722

Born in Canada and living in Los Angeles, California, Cory Doctorow is
an essayist, activist, teacher, and author (The Internet Con. How to
Seize the Means of Computation, Verso, 2023; The Bezzle, Tor Books, 240
pages, not translated). He has chronicled the development of digital
technology since the early days of the Internet, on his website
Pluralistic and in various media outlets, including in February in the
Financial Times to critique the evolution of major platforms and social
networks. In December 2023, he referred in a column to artificial
intelligence (AI) as a "bubble," a topic that has been a growing debate
in the industry in recent months. Mr. Doctorow questions the economic
balance between the costs of large AI models, such as those used in the
ChatGPT chatbots, and the revenues from different use cases. Why do you
think AI is a "bubble"? Artificial intelligence is a bubble because it
bears all the hallmarks of one. We see entrepreneurs adding the word
"AI" to their products to boost their stock price, without really
knowing what this technology will bring them. It recalls the time when
blockchain \[technology that allows to authenticate actions, like
cryptocurrency transactions\] was in vogue. We also see a lot of
investment flowing into manufacturers of AI models, which often lose
money. The promise is that these companies will convince customers
willing to pay enough to amortize the cost of this software, but they
have difficulty explaining how they will do it. Finally, there is this
impression that everyone seems to want to talk about AI, about any
subject, sometimes apparently unrelated, like climate change... Why do
you doubt the economic model of large AI models? There is a gap between
the costs, very significant, and the potential revenues. Many of the
applications of AI that offer the greatest revenue prospects are
susceptible to what the industry calls "hallucinations," or errors
\[such as a factually wrong answer in a text\]. But no one in AI has a
convincing theory about how to eliminate these errors. When it comes to
these sensitive use cases (healthcare, autonomous driving, etc.), AI
companies typically propose the solution of adding a human in the loop,
to verify the decision or content produced by the software. But the
practical and financial interest of these AIs is, according to their
creators, that they are supposed to act much more quickly than humans.
And if we need people to review each of their actions, this limits
profitability and potential productivity gains. Compared to other
technologies that have generated excessive hype, such as the metaverse
or cryptocurrencies, does not AI generate many more uses? Yes, there are
many interesting use cases. The Internet Archive has acquired databases
of old newspapers on microfiche and is using AI to identify and scan
table of contents pages to classify them. The Be My Eyes app for the
blind describes objects you point your phone at. My wife uses
image-generating AI to create scenery for her online games of the
role-playing game Dungeons & Dragons. That's great, but such projects
won't pay for the expensive computations needed to train and run these
large models. Ditto for students using a chatbot to cheat... These are
at best marginal markets on the periphery of a core business that should
be made up of enterprise customers, like office software like Excel.
When you look at AI applications, you have to ask yourself whether they
represent significant potential savings for a customer, particularly in
labor, and whether they can tolerate a certain error rate... And the
intersection of those two categories gives you a relatively small pool
of cases. Can't AI improve productivity? Yes, but the question is
whether it can deliver significant productivity gains for customers who
will be willing to pay a lot for it. OpenAI founder Sam Altman is
considering a multi-trillion-dollar microprocessor manufacturing project
\[according to the Wall Street Journal \]. Short of that, billions are
being spent on creating these models and hundreds of billions of dollars
are being spent on data centers, particularly for AI-related computing.
Show me the hundreds of billions of dollars in revenue per year that
customers are willing to pay. At this point, they're not materializing.
In Europe and France, start-ups and governments consider it necessary to
invest in AI to avoid being overtaken by the United States or China. Are
they wrong? There is nothing wrong with investing to avoid being
overtaken in important areas: public health, computer science education,
solar energy or electricity. But it is not serious to be overtaken in
online scams or computer viruses... And today, I think that the "AI
bros" \[the apostles of artificial intelligence\] are a mixture of
people who lie and people who are wrong about the potential of their
technology. Don't giants like Google or Microsoft have ways to amortize
their investments in this area? They sell AI models to companies but
also computer calculations, they deploy AI on their own services... They
have more ways to make money with AI. A famous American saying goes that
the best way to get rich during the gold rush was to sell your picks and
shovels. This is a pretty cynical idea, because you know that most gold
diggers will end up as skeletons on the side of the road... Of course,
if you also get a share of the gold harvested by the miners, it's even
better. But, in AI, digital giants are also directly involved in the
search for gold: they stuff their platforms (search engines, social
networks, smartphones...) with assistants and AI features that are not
very useful or not yet mature enough to be deployed. This risks making
their products less attractive and putting them at risk of reputation...
It's one thing to be a cynic, but a proverb says that the worst thing
for a dealer is to consume your own drugs... Aren't AI assistants
improving the big platforms? I rather find that they contribute to
making smartphones, search engines or social networks worse. Deploying
AI widely in this way can be a way to increase the stock price of a
company, which is good for its shareholders and its managers, who are
part of it. However, recently, we are entering a more complicated
situation, where stock market investors are asking the sector for
returns on the huge investments made in AI. This is what happened with
the metaverse. The difference is that the companies concerned had
stopped investing in these virtual worlds, whereas with AI they seem
stuck in their commitment to developing this technology. At the
beginning of the Web, there was also the \"Internet bubble\", but this
crash did not prevent this technology from developing in the long
term\... Indeed, we can distinguish productive bubbles and
non-productive bubbles - even if they are all bad, because they transfer
money from small savers to very rich people. The Internet bubble was
productive. It left behind a lot of fiber optic Internet connection
networks, a lot of people trained in computer science and coding...
Conversely, the cryptocurrency bubble of recent years has certainly
trained people in cryptography and cybersecurity, but it has mostly left
behind some very bad digital art (NFTs) \[non-fungible tokens\] and
embodied a bad example of neoliberal economic doctrine. A lot of money
has gone up in smoke. And AI? The question is: will it be a productive
bubble? This technology creates more specialists in statistics and
mathematics, which is a good thing. It has made it possible to find
methods to use graphics processors (or "GPUs") much more efficiently.
Besides, perhaps one day there will be a surplus of GPUs, like after the
Internet bubble, when you could buy company servers at auction for \$10
each. These will be productive, reusable residues. There will also
remain smaller AI models, such as Meta's Llama or those on the Hugging
Face platform, which can run on conventional computers and are freely
available as open source. These are generating interesting creativity,
although they also risk reaching a ceiling, since they are mostly
derived from the large models created by AI manufacturers. There is also
an open question about the role that federated learning, which involves
sharing computing power among thousands of personal computers, as in the
SETI@home project to analyze data from the Hubble telescope, could play
for AI. But this is only one avenue of research, and it would not
necessarily improve economic returns on investment.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1723

The yellow and red flagpole in the middle of the shopping mall parking
lot shines like a beacon to American motorists. At any time of the day
or night, there is always a Denny\'s restaurant to welcome hungry
visitors. But the one on Berryessa Road in east San Jose, California,
has become the most famous in the country. It has the same old-fashioned
red tables, chairs and couches as the chain\'s 1,000 other restaurants
in the United States. In a discreet corner, above the corner booth, a
brand-new plaque warns: \"This location is the birthplace of a
trillion-dollar company. Congratulations, Nvidia! Who would have thought
that an idea launched here would change the world?\" » The hero of this
story, Jensen Huang, co-founder and CEO of the company Nvidia, came in
person on September 26, 2023, to pay tribute to this modest reminder of
his laborious beginnings, as if to better engrave his legend. \"I
started as a dishwasher at Denny\'s,\" he often recalls in his speeches,
a memory of his student years. Now, television channels are jostling to
receive him. It must be said that with Elon Musk he is the most
prominent personality in Silicon Valley. One of the richest, too.
Because his company, of which he owns 3.5% of the capital, is no longer
worth \$1,000 billion (906 billion euros) on the stock market, as
indicated on the plaque, but more than \$2,500 billion. On June 18, it
even surpassed Microsoft and Apple, at the extreme altitude of \$3,300
billion, to briefly become the most valuable firm in the world. Yet
Nvidia does not produce smartphones, computers or software, just
electronic cards. But these are magic. They are the keys to the
disturbing and fascinating world of artificial intelligence (AI). Due to
their computing speed and flexibility of use, they are currently
unrivaled on the market. As a result, when Microsoft, Google or Amazon
decided, in 2023, to invest tens of billions of dollars in data centers
intended to train AI models, such as OpenAI\'s ChatGPT conversational
robot, they had no choice but to knock on Nvidia\'s door. And their
billions fell directly into the pocket of the San José company.
Martingale In the year 2023 (fiscal year ending at the end of January),
its sales jumped 126%, to 61 billion dollars, and its net profit was
close to 30 billion. Unheard of in the austere world of chip
manufacturers, or even in technology in general. Intel, in the glory
days of its PC monopoly with Microsoft, has never achieved such
performance. Nor has Apple in the midst of the iPhone frenzy. So much so
that analysts are perplexed: flash in the pan, bubble or change of era?
To better understand this madness, we must return to Denny\'s in San
Jose in 1993. At that time, Jen-Hsun \"Jensen\" Huang was a young
30-year-old engineer, who had emigrated from Taiwan at the age of 9 and
was employed by the electronics company LSI Logic. At the back of the
café, he remade the world with his friends Chris Malachowsky and Curtis
Priem, both chip designers at the computer company Sun Microsystems. The
obsession of the moment was the graphic rendering on computer screens.
This did not only bother computer scientists, but also video game fans,
frustrated by the poor rendering of Atari consoles or Nintendo Game
Boys. The microcomputer took off, but not the images, which were still
very rustic. There was a lack of chips powerful enough to animate all of
this. The three friends launched Nvidia (invidia means \"desire\" in
Latin), and for three years they got lost in false technical leads
before finding, on the verge of bankruptcy, the winning combination:
designing an electronic card composed of a graphics chip (processor)
that only took care of the image, compatible with Windows PCs and
specifically adapted to video games. The market was in its infancy, but
it was starting to show up with the appearance of three-dimensional
games. Doom, released in 1993, was one of the first where the shooter
was the player himself, transformed into a superhero who slaughtered as
many demons as possible. The graphics card was essential to animate such
carnage. From this first period, Nvidia took away the first two
ingredients of its success: specialization in chips capable of very
high-speed operations thanks to parallel computing and the importance of
building close relationships with computer developers, designers of all
these increasingly realistic little monsters. Its GeForce cards became
the reference for all gamers in the world and game designers. To make
their task easier, the company developed a software ecosystem that made
it possible to adapt the graphics card to the desired application.
Called \"Cuda\", this software library is today the keystone of the
Nvidia system, with no equivalent on this scale among the competition.
This is the company\'s third asset: making its hardware a platform, like
Apple or Amazon, with its software environment that makes the work of
users easier and makes it complicated to transfer to its rivals. Jensen
Huang gradually realized that the research community was increasingly
fond of its hardware for the formidable computing capabilities it
offered. Notably at the University of Toronto, in Canada. This is where
the British Geoffrey Hinton officiates. A big name in the computer
science world, specializing in neural networks that attempt to replicate
the functioning of the brain. He is nicknamed the \"godfather of AI\".
He has seen the Frenchman Yann Le Cun pass through his laboratory, with
whom he will share, along with Yoshua Bengio, in 2018, the Turing Prize,
the \"Nobel Prize for computer scientists\". Since 2009, he has been
using Nvidia cards to train his networks. In 2012, one of his doctoral
students, Alex Krizhevsky, with his colleague Ilya Sutskever, bought two
GeForce cards on Amazon to train, in his room, an image recognition
system, fed day and night with millions of photos for a week. Named
\"AlexNet\", the system won hands down the national ImageNet image
recognition competition. The only one to use graphics cards instead of
supercomputers, it recognizes trucks, cars, cats and others, with an
accuracy ten points higher than its competitors. It is a consecration
for the three researchers... and for Nvidia. At least in the world of
research. Because, for the moment, it is video games that massively
support society. \"Real challenge\" Nevertheless, Jensen Huang, who
closely follows the exploits of the researchers, stays the course. The
rest follows impeccably. Geoffrey Hinton and the very young Alex
Krizhevsky are hired by Google, while Ilya Sutskever joins a nascent and
more idealistic company, OpenAI. They take with them the conviction of
Nvidia\'s supremacy in terms of calculation. When, in November 2022,
OpenAI displays to the general public the dizzying prowess of generative
AI with ChatGPT, the demonstration of the maturity of the technology is
made. From then on, everyone wanted in. Start-ups flourished, fed by
money from venture capital and Internet giants. Microsoft gave OpenAI
\$10 billion and launched a \$50 billion investment plan to develop data
centers adapted to training its machines, which had to swallow all the
knowledge of the Internet for months before producing a single
intelligible sentence. Amazon invested \$4 billion in Anthropic,
OpenAI\'s competitor. A market was born, ringing and stumbling for
Nvidia, whose technology is unparalleled. According to the specialist
site TechRadar, the company holds more than 80% of it. Since it cannot
supply everyone, it dictates its price and chooses its customers. It
costs between \$30,000 and \$50,000 for a single graphics processor. The
largest centers can have several thousand. This is another strength of
the company: the ability -- and tenacity -- to position itself in
markets that do not yet exist, what Jensen Huang calls "zero billion
markets." "What is important," he explained to students at Harvard
University on March 6, "is not the size of a market, but the importance
of the work that we provide." Innovation precedes the market. This was
the case in 3D video, then in data centers and in AI. He hopes that this
will happen in autonomous driving cars, drug design or simulation, which
he calls "omniverse." All areas that the firm cultivates with the
patience of a gardener. However, not everyone has this patience.
Investors, among others, are starting to ask questions. "Today, a
significant part of the demand is made up of start-ups, often financed
by Google, Amazon or Microsoft. In return, they run the data centers of
their benefactors, but for what end use? asks digital specialist Benoît
Flamant, head of equities at Swiss broker Coges Corraterie Gestion. This
is summed up in the Goldman Sachs study published at the end of June,
with this title: \"Generative AI: too much expense, too little
benefit?\" For the moment, end customers, i.e. manufacturers, are
testing applications, but they are not yet willing to pay suppliers what
they pay for. As a result, they are all losing money, starting with the
market leader, OpenAI. \"Hundreds of billions are invested in these
language models. All of this must be converted into products that
customers can use and for which they are willing to pay. This is the
real challenge and, at this stage, there is no proof that it will
work,\" believes Alan Priestley, vice-president of Gartner. For him, we
are on the eve of a great disillusionment, a classic phenomenon of any
nascent innovation. The recent financial results of Google and Microsoft
have disappointed and fueled this nascent doubt. Beyond that, questions
are emerging about the rest of the story. As Yann Le Cun, now scientific
director of Meta, explains in a podcast (\"Génération Do It Yourself\"),
deep learning, of which he is one of the inventors, consists of training
machines to recognize words or images by telling them each time whether
their choice is good or bad, as we do for a child with a picture book.
We can also train it to understand a structure and guess missing words
in a text. It quickly integrates a probability to predict the word.
Artificial intelligence is the reign of rote learning and statistics.
But is this true intelligence? That is the whole debate. For the
scientist, language models cannot describe the physical reality that a
4-year-old child apprehends, which is considerably richer and harder to
model. We have agents who answer questions and write reports at the
speed of light, but none of them know how to clean or drive a car
easily. Because physical reality is infinitely more complex than all the
literature learned by heart on the Internet. Are we on the royal road to
AI or on an \"off-ramp\", as Le Cun now claims? Insolent margins
Inevitably, these questions will have repercussions on Nvidia\'s
prospects. Especially since competition is coming from all sides. First
from its direct rivals, such as AMD, whose graphics product is
considered \"competitive\" by Alan Priestley of Gartner, but also from
its own customers. Google, Amazon, Microsoft, Meta, Tesla: all are
developing chip design projects. They intend to end the Nvidia monopoly
and its insolent margins of more than 70%, but they are also seeking to
lower the prices of a technology that risks being unsaleable if it is
too expensive. To do this, Meta and others are betting on the strength
of open source, the development of a chip whose plans are open to
everyone with a view to continuous improvement. In order to trivialize
infrastructure hardware. This is, basically, the normal cycle of
technological innovation. Value is transferred from the upstream -- here
the chip -- to the downstream -- the applications and the service. Aware
of the danger, Nvidia no longer sees itself as an electronics engineer,
but as a supplier of solutions for all the professions that want to
seize AI: automotive, pharmaceuticals, robotics, simulation, etc. "We
are only at the beginning of the story," assures Serge Palaric, Vice
President of Alliances for Europe at Nvidia. "Anyone can develop a chip,
but we are bringing a new computing architecture combined with the
appropriate software to meet the needs of end users, right down to the
inside of their products, such as cars." » The firm is counting on its
non-hierarchical culture, its practice of sharing information internally
and the energy of its boss to negotiate this shift and become the
Microsoft or Apple of the AI era. A change of scale that will happen
without the pioneers. Geoffrey Hinton, the \"godfather of AI\", and his
student Alex Krizhevsky have left Google. The old researcher is now
warning of the risks of AI drifting out of control. His protégé
preferred to disappear from the radar. As for his comrade Ilya
Sutskever, he left OpenAI, which he ran with Sam Altman, due to a
disagreement with the latter on the subject of security. Doubt has no
place in Silicon Valley.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1724

I think it is possible that Twitter will exceed one billion monthly
users within twelve to eighteen months.\" This statement by Elon Musk
dates from November 27, 2022, shortly after his acquisition of the
social network. Twenty months later, the multi-billionaire has lost his
bet. Certainly, the platform, renamed \"X\" on July 23, 2023, has gained
monthly active users: there are now 570 million, according to figures
released in July by the company, an increase of 6% compared to last
year. But the number of people who connect each day is stagnating, at
250 million - the same value as when the platform was acquired. If the
thunderous arrival of Elon Musk was able to convince new users, it has
also scared others away, in successive waves. At the time of the
takeover, when Internet users, scalded by the personality of the Tesla
and SpaceX boss, preferred to leave the social network. In the weeks and
months that followed, when Elon Musk made a series of controversial
decisions: reducing the moderation team to a minimum, reinstating Donald
Trump, charging for the blue badges that, until then, ensured the
authenticity of an account\... Or after October 7, 2023 and the Hamas
attack on Israel, when the atmosphere became unbreathable on X. Among
the deserters, celebrities like Elton John, Jim Carrey, Whoopi Goldberg
and Trent Reznor. Niche social networks Leaving Twitter, but to go
where? \"Join me on Mastodon,\" some accounts had proclaimed as soon as
the takeover took place, encouraging their subscribers to follow them on
this microblogging service, Twitter\'s main competitor at the time.
While it may look like Twitter at first glance (messages limited to 500
characters and similar features), its philosophy is different. Mastodon,
launched in 2016, is "open source" -- meaning that anyone can access its
source code -- and decentralized -- meaning that anyone can create their
own server, called an "instance," with their own rules. Elon Musk's
acquisition of Twitter had greatly benefited Mastodon. In one month, the
number of registered users had increased from 3.6 to 5.4 million. It now
stands at 8.7 million. A nice progression, but it is clear that these
new subscribers... do not necessarily use the social network. While the
Musk earthquake had allowed Mastodon to exceed, for the first time, one
million monthly active users, today there are only 853,000 of them
logging in at least once a month. A figure that is certainly twice as
high as in October 2022. But not comparable to the 570 million monthly
active users claimed by X. Mastodon is not the only social network to
have tried to take advantage of the changes at Twitter to convince new
users. Coincidence of the calendar? Probably not. Just a few days before
the official announcement of the acquisition of Twitter by Elon Musk,
Bluesky opened a waiting list to allow Internet users to test this new
platform. The project, launched in 2019 under the leadership of Twitter
and its CEO at the time, Jack Dorsey, became independent in 2022.
Bluesky then welcomed exiles from the platform with the blue bird, of
which it is a clone. Similar interface and functionality, messages
limited to 300 characters\... Easier to access than Mastodon for
novices, it is now doing better than the latter, with 1.2 million active
users per month. Which nevertheless remains, again, very far behind the
figures of X. Both of them now serve more as niche social networks, or
even refuges for communities -- LGBTQ +, for example -- who may have
been victims of harassment on X and benefit, on these more confidential
platforms, from a certain serenity. The strike force of Meta The only
serious competitor that seems to be emerging today is the latest,
Threads. And for good reason: this social network is supported by the
Meta group, parent company of Facebook, Instagram and WhatsApp, and
benefits from its enormous strike force. Launched on July 6, 2023, a few
days before Elon Musk renamed Twitter "X", Threads copies its main
features. And assumes: on the day of the launch, Meta\'s boss, Mark
Zuckerberg, had published a message on Twitter (something he had not
done for a decade and has not done since) ironizing the resemblance
between Threads and its model. Seven hours after the launch of Threads
(in the United States, because Europe had to wait until December), Mark
Zuckerberg already claimed more than 10 million subscribers. Five days
later: 100 million, a record. Today, after only one year of existence,
the social network has more than 175 million active users per month.
\"What a year,\" Mark Zuckerberg rejoiced when announcing these figures
in early July. If Threads is far ahead of X\'s other competitors, it is
above all because it is interconnected with Instagram, one of the most
popular social networks in the world. To sign up for Threads, you must
first have an Instagram account. This allows you to have contacts on the
new social network from the outset and not find yourself faced with an
empty news feed - a major advantage over the competition. Above all,
there is a tab in Instagram, which redirects directly to the new
platform. Does it have a chance of matching or even supplanting X? "The
goal is not to replace Twitter," assured Adam Mosseri, the boss of
Instagram, after the launch of Threads. He explained that the new
platform was aimed at people "looking for a less vehement discussion
space" and that content relating to current events and politics would
not be encouraged on the social network. On X, on the contrary, these
are valued. Often divisive, they generate more "engagement," that is to
say reactions or shares, and are highlighted by the recommendation
algorithm. Elon Musk often presents X as a place of information. "This
platform is the number one source of news in the world," the businessman
said in January. Microblogging leader An asset for X. When the news gets
out of control, it is to it that Internet users turn, for the speed of
information dissemination, the diversity of sources and the vigor of
conversations. The social network thus broke, according to Elon Musk, a
record for attendance on June 27, the evening of the debate between Joe
Biden and Donald Trump. After the assassination attempt against the
latter, the X application also saw its number of downloads soar. For
better or for worse: in these times of news, it is difficult to avoid
violent content and false information, which have multiplied since the
arrival of Elon Musk. X therefore maintains itself as the leader of
microblogging, which none of its competitors can currently claim to
dethrone. However, it remains far, far from the social network giants
that are Instagram, TikTok, and especially Facebook, to which more than
2 billion people connect every day.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1725

For digital writing specialist Marcello Vitali-Rosati, the global bug
should allow us to reflect on the fact that Gafam are stripping us of
all control. What lesson can we learn from the global bug caused by
CrowdStrike, a company unknown to the general public until Friday?
Author of an Eloge du bug (La Découverte, May 2024), Marcello
Vitali-Rosati is a professor at the University of Montreal and holder of
the Canada Research Chair in digital writing. This philosopher of code
and algorithms invites us to take advantage of this imposed break to
question our collective practices, and to highlight the commercial
rhetoric of Gafam which, behind the promise of a \"functional
imperative\", strips us of all control. Is this situation new? What is
surprising is that it does not happen more often. Bugs occur all the
time, and that is a good thing. The bug reveals the tool, the break
allows us for the first time to look at it, according to the
Heideggerian principle. As long as we hammer, we do not think about what
a hammer is and what its usefulness is. The novelty of this one is that
it Interview reveals to us a complex architecture and an unprecedented
concentration of platforms. Suddenly, we realize that a huge amount of
companies depend on a single company that is private. Nobody knew until
Friday morning what CrowdStrike was or what is in our phones, and this
reveals to us that we are as dependent as children on their parents.
This system, Microsoft in reality, manages very well the rest of the
time, without us realizing it. This would not have happened if a
multiplicity of companies managed this software. You draw up a typology
of bugs in your book. How would you characterize this one? It is the
simplest form of bug. That is to say that the tool malfunctions. It is
the one that blocks Socrates while he is walking, bringing out
philosophy. It is not a cyberattack that allows us to point out a
culprit. I note that the software stopped working after an update, that
is to say after it was asked to do something more, to improve its
security system, in a logic of profitability and performance. This is
what the Gafam sell, a promise of smooth operation, a \"functional
imperative\". If something does not work, we hide it, we make it
disappear. Their commercial rhetoric invites us not to ask ourselves any
questions. Brassard OL- Finally, could this bug have some virtue? This
bug has its good side because it reveals something to us that was
previously opaque. One of the answers that will certainly be given is
\"let\'s invest more in security\", to increase performance. Or perhaps
to switch from Microsoft to Apple, which will take advantage of this
situation to promise that it will provide more. The alternative is to
stop for a moment and take the time to reflect on the fact that we are
no longer masters of what we do. Is it justified or relevant that all
these companies, with different cultures, objectives and operations,
find that the same solution suits them? Does it correspond to our
values? Commercial rhetoric prevents us from seeing that there is
nothing neutral behind a digital tool. Cyberspace, cloud, digital, IT,
technology... Everything is confused for many people. Why? It reflects
this broad idea that we are in the digital age without really knowing
what it refers to. This rhetoric of immateriality claims not to worry
about trivial tasks -- taking out the trash -- that they should be
delegated to "little hands" in order to focus only on immaterial things
like thought. To make itself invisible, the infrastructure uses
metaphors like the cloud, something that floats in the air, that cannot
be touched, while it is about gigantic computers that heat up, with an
immense impact on the environment and communities. It is cleaner to talk
about the cloud than about cables! What do you envisage to try to reduce
this dependence? Alternative trends exist, in favor of free software for
example. If the code had been open, the community could have reacted, we
would have been more autonomous. CrowdStrike has administrator
privileges on computers over which the owners themselves do not have
control! Linux servers are more stable because a whole community is
constantly auditing its tools. On the other hand, there is low-tech. Is
it really interesting to put all this data on the cloud rather than
using paper, or simpler platforms, even digital ones? Most of the
services affected could have benefited from a less high-tech, less
cumbersome approach. How can we change our mentality on an individual
level? I believe more in collective choices. It is problematic to place
all the responsibility on individuals, opposing for example those who
would have time to repair, tinker, and those who would not have it. The
bug, however, comes from outside, it is not the result of our intention
and an individual effort. We must accept the idea of wasted time,
against the idea of performance and profitability, to realize that the
main objective of Gafam is not to improve our lives but to produce
wealth.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1726

It's "the \$600 billion question," writes David Cahn, a partner at
Sequoia Partners, a long-standing Silicon Valley tech investment firm.
According to his calculations, set out in a lengthy post published on
June 20, that's the amount of revenue that would be needed to make
current investments in the sector profitable. "The AI \[artificial
intelligence\] bubble is reaching a tipping point," he warns, pointing
to a gap between planned spending and revenue. This observation was also
raised in a note from investment bank Goldman Sachs, published on June
25 and titled: "Generative AI: Too much spending for too little
benefit?" \"Generative\" AI (this family of software capable of creating
texts, images or sounds, popularized since the launch of ChatGPT, at the
end of 2022) is a \"real invention\", but it is the subject of \"too
much optimism and hype\", declares in particular the professor at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology Daron Acemoglu. These notes
encouraging caution join a little music heard in recent months among
other observers. "Beware of AI euphoria," warned Financial Times
columnist Rana Foroohar, while digital essayist Cory Doctorow and
Guardian columnist John Naughton predicted a "bubble." A recent article
in The Economist suggested that generative AI could well be a case of
"overinvestment in infrastructure, fuelled by the excitement of a new
technology," comparing it to the "railway craze" of the late 19th
century or the "telecoms boom" of the early internet in the 2000s.
Relatively low revenues Spending on generative AI is a sign that
industry giants may be overestimating "people's willingness to pay for
chatbots or the latest tools," wrote the British business magazine. The
starting point for these fears is the amounts invested in
infrastructure, mainly data centers capable of providing the computing
capacity needed to train and then run generative AI models: \$200
billion (€186 billion) in 2024, for the four giants Amazon, Microsoft,
Google and Meta (Facebook, Instagram), or 45% more than in 2023 and 180%
compared to 2019, according to the analyst firm Bernstein Research.
Fueled by the high price of AI-specific processors from the leader
Nvidia, this spending will continue, as new generations of these
specialized chips are coming, notes Sequoia Capital. The sector is
planning investments of around \$1 trillion over the next few years.
\"What \$1 trillion problem will AI solve?\" asks Jim Covello, head of
Global Equity Research at Goldman Sachs. According to him, generative AI
is currently mainly used to \"make existing processes - such as writing
computer code - more efficient\" - often with an additional cost and
also with an \"error\" rate - but \"no truly transformative and
profitable application has been found\". However, in the face of these
colossal investments, revenues remain relatively low. OpenAI, the
creator of ChatGPT, in which Microsoft has invested 13 billion dollars,
would have an annual turnover of 3.4 billion, according to The
Information. Anthropic - in which Amazon and Google have invested 6
billion dollars - would aim to reach 850 million in 2024, according to
the same media. Perplexity AI would generate around 20 million dollars
per year, according to the American media TechCrunch. Even adding in
amounts estimated at around \$10 billion in turnover per giant such as
Google, Microsoft or Amazon, there remains a substantial \"hole\", warns
Mr. Cahn of Sequoia. Diversified giants \"Will successes come quickly
enough to justify today\'s investments? It\'s a strategic question of
risk\" and a \"gamble\", acknowledged Yann LeCun in Les Echos. The head
of AI at Meta highlighted in passing the current limits of language
processing models and their uncertain economic model, especially since
open source alternatives exist whose licenses are free. In addition, the
research that would allow future AIs to begin to \"plan or reason\" will
take at least five years, he noted. Finally, the Goldman Sachs note
underlines, the significant electricity needs linked to computer
calculations for AI will require additional investments in electrical
networks. Of course, not everyone paints such a bleak picture. There is
a "very real possibility that the AI cost equation will change," says
Goldman Sachs software market specialist Kash Rangan, who believes in
price drops and the emergence of new use cases. "People didn't think
they needed smartphones, Uber or Airbnb before they existed," agrees his
colleague Eric Sheridan. And unlike the startups of the early Internet
bubble, AI players today are often profitable and diversified giants,
with "massive distribution networks and user bases," notes Mr. Rangan.
"With every technological revolution, there are excesses: in the early
2000s, an ADSL Internet connection was valued at several thousand euros,
it was not reasonable. But in the end, there were still some big
winners,\" says Pierre-Eric Leibovici, a partner at the French fund
Daphni, who has invested in AI start-ups such as Mistral, H and Pasqal.
\"Speculative frenzies are part of technology,\" concedes Mr. Cahn, at
Sequoia, but we should not believe the \"illusion\" spread from Silicon
Valley to the rest of the world, according to which \"\[they are\] all
going to get rich quickly because a superintelligence is going to emerge
tomorrow.\" \"In reality, the road will be long, with ups and downs,\"
he warns.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1727

This is the best-kept secret in the so-called \"generative\" artificial
intelligence (AI) sector, that of ChatGPT, Gemini, Copilot, etc. It is
not hidden in the computing power, nor in the colossal size (hundreds of
billions of parameters) of these software programs, nor in clever
computer codes. These aspects of course count for success, but they are
now more or less public. No, what the leaders in the field, OpenAI,
Anthropic, Mistral, Microsoft, etc. have never revealed yet is their
recipe for creating the collection of texts used to train their models.
The latter is used to adjust the parameters in order to predict as best
as possible which word is the best to complete a sentence. This
ingestion of billions of texts identifies statistical correlations that
make it possible to generate new texts supposed to answer the user\'s
questions. The origin of these texts is known: books in the public
domain, research articles, Wikipedia, but above all tons of web pages.
This last source is the majority and it is the way in which it is
treated that makes the difference. \"It is the crux of the matter\",
summarizes Julien Launay, creator of the company Adaptive ML and
co-author of a training corpus of data from the Web, RefinedWeb, when he
worked at LightOn. He remembers the surprise caused by his presentation
in New Orleans in December 2022 at the leading conference in the field,
NeurIPS. The care taken in preparing this data had allowed an AI to
match the competition fed with data from more varied sources. 80,000
hours of calculations Thomas Wolf, co-founder of Hugging Face, a
Franco-American platform for making models and corpora available in open
source, present at this conference, offered Julien Launay\'s team to
join his company. One of its members, Guilherme Penedo, accepted,
motivated by the idea of providing an even larger corpus than
RefinedWeb. \"We thought we could do it in ten days,\" recalls Thomas
Wolf. It would take fifteen times longer. On April 21, FineWeb was
released, a monster weighing 40 terabytes (TB), rich in 15,000 billion
tokens, tokens of 3-4 letters, a sort of syllable. Freely downloadable,
it allows you to create better models than with any other public corpus.
Making such an object is difficult: 80,000 hours of calculations with
Nvidia\'s H100 graphics cards were necessary, which is comparable to
what it takes to train a good AI model. First, the data must be
retrieved. Since 2007, a foundation has made available Common Crawl, a
collection, at regular intervals, of billions of Web pages. But to be
useful for language models, only the text must be extracted from this
mass of information. "This was one of the longest steps in the process,
maybe 80% of the computation time, which we started in November 2023,"
says Guilherme Penedo. Ninety-six packets collected over fifteen years
in Common Crawl were used for a volume of about 5,354 TB. Then, an
initial cleaning removes the pages of pornographic sites, then only
retains the pages in English. About 50% of the documents are eliminated.
36,000 billion tokens remain. Change of tactics Then comes the tricky
question. How do you know that a corpus is "good"? No question of asking
a human. So we ask the machines. An AI model is trained on this corpus.
If the benchmark performance is good, then the corpus is good... Since
this requires a lot of calculations, the team worked with "small"
models, with 1.2 billion parameters (the ChatGPT engine exceeded 170
billion parameters). Then it was time for a big clean-up with the
removal of duplicates, because reading the same text twice does not add
anything. This is "deduplication". The team applied it to its entire
corpus. "I was convinced that the result would be as good as
RefinedWeb", remembers Guilherme Penedo. Disappointment! The team then
changed tactics and decided to deduplicate each Common Crawl packet
independently and not globally. Won, the performance increased by 2
percentage points: FineWeb is as good as its predecessor. It has 20,000
billion tokens left, 40% of "loss". To do better, a final clean-up
eliminates nonsense texts that the Web is full of to attract search
engines or produce spam. Dozens of statistics describe a text: average
sentence length, percentage of special characters in a text, number of
lines ending with a period... At what value should these values be
considered "abnormal"? The team retained a dozen of these metrics and
tested different thresholds. "It wasn't the most fun step!" confesses
Hynek Kydlicek, from Hugging Face. But it paid off. Three statistical
conditions remove a certain number of documents but not too many, while
increasing performance: 5,000 billion more tokens evaporate but FineWeb
outperforms Refinedweb by about 1%, as well as others like Dolma, The
Pile, C4... Euphoric, the team launched a final step: selecting only
"educational" documents to build an ideal corpus for knowledge tasks.
FineWeb-Edu was born, with only 1,300 billion tokens, and outperforms
FineWeb by almost 4%. The selection of the \"good\" texts was done by
asking a generative AI to rate all the FineWeb documents from 1 to 5, to
keep only the best evaluated. \"By detailing our steps, we help to
better understand the success of large language models. By making this
corpus available, actors will be able to develop their model by freeing
themselves from the tedious and costly steps in calculation of the
development of training data\", summarizes Thomas Wolf. The team is
already working on better versions for English or other languages. It
has also made available a tool, datatrove, to redo all their steps. Five
months of work summarized in 176 lines of code.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1728

Kyutai launches Moshi. These two cute but cryptic names borrow from the
Japanese words \"sphere\" and \"hello\". One designates a Parisian
laboratory of artificial intelligence (AI), and the other, its first
tool made public, a voice processing model. Like ChatGPT or Gemini for
text, like Dall-E or Midjourney for images, this one is placed in the
field of virtual assistants, but vocal. Capable of deciphering an oral
instruction and generating a response in a conversational style, Moshi
aims to be an alternative to equivalent tools from OpenAI (the creator
of ChatGPT), Google or Apple (Siri). But it claims to be made in France
and open source, that is to say freely usable and modifiable. Moshi is
Kyutai\'s first publication since its grand launch on November 17, 2023.
This €300 million laboratory is atypical on the Parisian scene, as it is
financed by patrons: the French Xavier Niel (founder of the telecoms
operator Iliad and personal shareholder of the Le Monde Group) and
Rodolphe Saadé, CEO of the shipping company CMA-CGM, as well as the
American Eric Schmidt, former CEO of Google turned investor. \"The best
of both worlds\" It was created by poaching six AI researchers from
American giants such as Meta and Google DeepMind. Its project is to
\"make innovative AI foundation models and publish them,\" summarizes
its director, Patrick Pérez. The idea behind Kyutai is to create a
hybrid benefiting from the best of both worlds, academic research for
its freedom and the business world for its resources. » Moshi therefore
wants to be innovative, even compared to global competition. Kyutai has
chosen the field of sound, which is less busy than that of text
generation models (where OpenAI, Google or Anthropic already operate,
but also the French Mistral or LightOn). \"Usually, voice AIs use
several successive models: one to detect the presence of a sound
instruction, another to transcribe it into text, another to understand
the request, another to produce the response and a last one to transform
it into voice. But this produces a latency of three to five seconds,
which is unpleasant in a conversation,\" explains researcher Neil
Zeghidour, who worked at Google on the AudioLM musical AI model. To
obtain \"real-time\" responses (a few hundred milliseconds), Moshi
relies on a unique AI model, trained directly on sound extracts. This
makes it possible to better decode and imitate emotions or accents, the
researchers assure. Moshi could adopt \"seventy styles and tones\":
whisper, take on a \"pirate voice\", speak English like a Frenchman\...
So many nuances inspired by the voice of a recorded actress. To
compensate for the lack of available sound data and improve reliability,
Kyutai has added a home-made text processing model (Helium) to the sound
model, which works in parallel. To allow for interruptions in a
conversation, Moshi also uses two streams, which allows it to \"speak
while listening\". As a demo effect, on Wednesday July 3, the assistant
sometimes continued to answer, even though it was asked another
question\... Offline use These features are similar to those shown in a
demo by OpenAI on May 13 in its presentation of the GPT4o model or to
those promised by Apple in June. However, these are not yet available to
the general public, which leads Kyutai to say that its online
demonstration is \"a first\". The lab also boasts of having reduced
Moshi\'s computing requirements, which allows it to be used offline, on
a MacBook Pro type computer, and \"soon\" on a smartphone. The sounds
produced can also be identified as \"created by an AI\", thanks to a
watermark inserted in the files, in order to combat disinformation or
identity theft. And now? Kyutai hopes that companies and institutions
will deploy Moshi. The lab still has some budget: according to our
information, it has only spent around 10 million euros, in salaries and
computing (via 1,000 Nvidia processors from the Scaleway supercomputer,
a subsidiary of Iliad). Its future research avenues concern
\"multimodal\" AI mixing text, image and sound, as well as improving
models in the French language. Kyutai hopes to access French-language
content from public institutions, but this raises copyright issues.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1729

When you lift the hood of an \"artificial intelligence\" (AI) to check
the mechanics that drive it, you sometimes get surprises. Microsoft\'s
Copilot, for example, does not run on Phy, the in-house machinery, but
on ChatGPT, developed by OpenAI. At the end of 2022, the sensational
arrival of this chatbot (conversational agent) shook up Google, whose
laboratories nevertheless contributed enormously to the advances in
generative AI in the 2010s. It is not surprising that Microsoft trusts
OpenAI: the software giant has invested 13 billion dollars (around 12
billion euros) in it. ChatGPT has other prestigious partners who
demonstrate the esteem of the sector, starting with Apple, which chose
it to co-host its future Apple Intelligence, alongside other in-house
artificial intelligences. At this time, there is a big gap between the
best generative mechanics, which bear the learned name of Large Language
Models (LLM), and their pursuers. The performance of these LLMs is
scrutinized with a magnifying glass, dozens of tests measure their
understanding, logic, translation, speed, etc. capabilities. Not to
mention their error rates. A more empathetic tone In the tech world, a
race has begun to catch up with OpenAI. Google has doubled down and its
artificial intelligence Gemini is among the best. Meta recently revealed
that by 2023, its investments in AI will amount to around \$35 billion.
And start-ups, which are increasing their fundraising, are not left
behind. Many of the companies publishing LLMs that stand out in the
tests are based in California. Antropic, Claude\'s publisher, raised \$4
billion from Amazon in 2023. Reka, which created Core, received \$60
million in funding the same year, when Palmyra, published by Writer,
raised \$100 million. Inflection, the creator of Pi, an AI with a more
empathetic tone and personalized responses based on each user\'s
interests, raised \$1.3 billion a year ago. In France, the young shoot
Mistral recently raised €600 million from French and American investors,
valuing the company at €5.8 billion. Its LLMs are well identified by
international AI researchers and rank high in the rankings. We also find
one of Mistral\'s models under the hood of the trendy American chatbot
Perplexity, which uses it alternately with Meta\'s LLM, named Llama. Two
models chosen because they are open source: some companies can thus
reuse and modify them freely. Llama has also spawned dozens of
offshoots, all the way to China, reveals the New York Times . Many other
models display a more specific positioning. The French start-up The H
Company raised \$220 million to develop an autonomous AI, capable of
reasoning, planning, and collaborating. The American artificial
intelligence KL3M from 273ventures offers to draft legal documents using
an LLM with sources certified free of copyright issues by the NGO Fairly
Trained. The company Databricks raised \$1.6 billion in 2021 to build a
faster and less expensive LLM, a claim that comes up in the arguments of
other start-ups in the sector.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1730

French publisher Mistral has built a great reputation internationally.
It positions itself as a wholesaler of textual generative AI for
businesses, but has also built a showcase on the Internet, which the
general public can consult freely: a chatbot named \"Le Chat\"
(chat.mistral.ai). It is interesting to compare the responses of Le Chat
to those of ChatGPT: the gap between the two is far from huge, as
LeMonde was able to observe. The Mistral company offers two families of
artificial intelligence, open source models that other companies can
download, modify, and use freely, then commercial models, much more
closed, which are also the most efficient. Company: Mistral; technology:
Mistral; cost: free

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1731

AWS is on track to break \$100 billion in revenue this year. If it were
independent, Amazon\'s cloud subsidiary would be among the 100 largest
companies in the world. But it is thinking even bigger. For several
months, the company has been making multiple investment announcements
worth tens of billions of dollars to push its pawns in artificial
intelligence around the world. On the one hand, AWS is expanding its
infrastructure of data centers and servers capable of handling the
complex calculations required to develop generative AI, which are very
power-intensive. United States, India, Saudi Arabia, Emirates, Mexico,
Spain (\$15 billion over ten years), Singapore (\$8 billion), Germany
(7.8 billion euros)\... In total, the company plans to invest at least
\$150 billion over the next fifteen years, because companies around the
world need more than ever storage capacity and computing power to use
the full capabilities of these new technologies. "We're seeing
incredible activity in AI right now, especially among startups in
Europe, like Hugging Face, which is on a mission to democratize
open-source AI models, or Mistral AI, which is also building amazing
foundation models," said Swami Sivasubramanian, AWS's vice president of
AI and data, during his visit to Paris. "Generative AI is fascinating to
the public, but this technology goes way beyond a simple chatbot, like
ChatGPT. It has the potential to disrupt all industries in a significant
way," he added. Investing more in specialized AI startups is also an
integral part of AWS's strategy. In addition to its \$4 billion
investment in Anthropic, a competitor to OpenAI, Amazon participated in
the €220 million fundraising of the young French startup H, which also
develops foundation models. The American giant has also just announced
an additional \$230 million, in the form of credits to use its
infrastructure, for young companies that use generative AI to solve
complex challenges in different sectors. If AWS is doubling down, it is
because the return on investment is already there. In the first quarter,
its operating profit was \$9.4 billion, contributing more than 60% to
that of the entire Amazon group. Generative AI is already a
\"multi-billion dollar\" growth driver, said Adam Selipsky, AWS CEO
replaced last May by Matt Garman (previously responsible for sales and
marketing), in the first quarter. And this is thanks to the acceleration
of spending on its professional offering for companies, several of which
are moving from the experimental phase to production. For companies that
build models, AWS provides a "state-of-the-art" infrastructure, with the
best Nvidia components, its in-house AI chips (Trainium and Inferentia)
and its Sagemaker software to build, train and deploy these models. For
companies that want to develop AI applications on already trained
models, the giant offers its Bedrock platform of models and tools. "We
were the first to say that no model will rule the world alone, that
there would be different models useful for different use cases. Today,
you can see that almost all cloud providers are imitating our strategy,"
underlines Swami Sivasubramanian. To develop its own generative AI
assistant for businesses, called Amazon Q, the group itself used several
models to meet different use cases (writing or debugging computer code,
helping to analyze business data, etc.). "There may be some
consolidation on the very large general-purpose models, but the
domain-specific models are going to explode in a big way," he adds. More
discreet about its strategic announcements in terms of generative AI
than other major American technology players, Amazon could have been
perceived for a time as being behind the times. "The big difference is
that we are not focusing on a consumer chatbot, but on how to make every
company an AI company, and to increase the productivity of every
employee within companies. So we tend to show that we deliver results
first, and we let customers speak for us rather than the other way
around," he emphasizes. Amazon is not forgetting the integration of
generative AI for the general public. The company is testing a virtual
assistant called Rufus that provides purchasing advice to American
customers browsing its e-commerce site. CEO Andy Jassy promised in his
April shareholder letter that "an even smarter Alexa" would be powered
by AI. A new version could enable it to hold conversations, provide more
relevant answers, and perform tasks that require the use of multiple
apps. "We're constantly innovating. And you'll see more and more
innovation powered by generative AI in a wide variety of Amazon
businesses, like advertising. Almost every aspect of Amazon is being
reinvented with generative AI," Sivasubramanian said. As the technology
becomes more widespread, it inevitably raises the question of how much
more energy will be consumed. "We're investing heavily to make the
process of training our models extremely energy efficient. And with
BedRock, we're giving our customers the option to choose the most
efficient model instead of the largest model." This means that at
runtime, you're not just saving money, you're saving energy," the
executive explains. In March, Amazon bought a data center in
Pennsylvania, USA, for \$650 million that is directly powered by an
adjacent power plant. Data centers are at the heart of the growth in
electricity demand around the world. According to a study published by
Goldman Sachs Research in May, data center energy demand will increase
by 160% worldwide by 2030, mainly because of AI. According to
calculations by the International Energy Agency, a single query on
ChatGPT requires 2.9 watt-hours of electricity compared to 0.3
watt-hours for a Google search. "For each layer of the technology stack,
we need to find the right energy optimization and sustainability
techniques so that we can address this problem effectively." And that is
exactly what we are doing," assures Swami Sivasubramanian. IV

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1732

As the European elections take place from 6 to 9 June, the issue of
digital technology is struggling to emerge in the public debate.
However, with research, these are eminently political subjects. It is
therefore urgent to break out of the current confinement and move
towards an ecosystem of sharing and free circulation of data. These are
the necessary conditions for innovation, strategic autonomy and digital
sovereignty of the European Union. Talents, legal framework, technical
solutions: all the elements are gathered in Europe. All that is missing
is a real awareness on the part of companies, and a political and
economic impetus. The European single market is based on the free
movement of people, goods, services and capital. It seems essential to
us that digital data also benefit from this freedom. Today, within
companies, administrations or for individual uses, the main model for
processing digital information is the cloud, which allows the storage,
processing and pooling of hardware and software resources. The value of
data is not so much based on its use as on its circulation. The
challenge is therefore to organize the circulation of data and the
creation of a virtuous dynamic between all stakeholders, through a
network of clouds that are heterogeneous by nature. The important thing
is no longer the tool or the location where the data is hosted, but
rather its ability to be negotiated and exchanged on a market. Closed
system architecture Three large American companies (Amazon, Microsoft
and Google) provide the majority of the industrial cloud clientele in
France, Europe and worldwide. While the characteristics of the solutions
offered are generally adapted to current needs, their closed system
architecture creates a form of dependency and hinders innovation. In
Europe, industrial awareness of the importance of the cloud is fairly
recent. Decision-makers have turned to existing solutions, which promote
their ability to protect company data. However, wanting to relate the
use of digital data only to those that are generated in-house can create
a loss of competitiveness, since progress and innovation do not exist in
a vacuum in the long term. On the contrary, the Catena-X project, which
networks all the players in the German automobile industry, is a good
example of the creation of a collaborative digital ecosystem. Companies
must think more in terms of importing external data and exporting some
of their data. This is crucial to establish their competitiveness in a
dynamic digital economy. Added to this argument is the question of
independence from cloud providers and the ability of companies to
escape, at a lower cost, from proprietary confinement, but also the
question of cybersecurity so that they can regain control of their own
security. The European market has more than 3 million open source
software developers, a figure higher than that of the United States,
according to the GitHub platform. If we add to this a supportive
regulatory framework that is part of a desire not to be locked in and
the existence of talented technology companies, Europe has particularly
fertile ground to nurture innovation and develop true infrastructure
independence. The aim here is not to catch up with any technological
delay in terms of cloud infrastructure, but to rethink the mechanisms
for circulating and negotiating data, independently of the proprietary
solutions for storing this data and their location. This involves, in
particular, setting up an open operating system for cloud platforms. The
objective: to free up data and applications, in a virtuous and secure
manner! In this area, current political and economic decisions must be
up to the challenges. They cannot be limited to this or that one-off
agreement with an American cloud provider. Citizens, political
decision-makers, leaders, it is time to take action. It is up to us to
make Europe the first continent in the world to develop a truly
liberated and dynamic digital economy!

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1733

Under the guise of administrative simplification, a bill, currently
being examined by the Senate, aims to accelerate the establishment of
mega data centers in France by bypassing the decision-making power of
local elected officials. On May 13, during the Choose France 2024
summit, Big Tech Amazon, Microsoft, IBM, the American real estate
investment company Equinix and the Japanese Telehouse announced a total
investment plan of nearly 7 billion euros for the expansion of their
infrastructures in France. These announcements mark a new stage in a
process that began several years ago. Because, in Europe and around the
world, the territorialization of digital infrastructures is advancing by
leaps and bounds. These data center installations are far from trivial.
They are first and foremost part of a global expansion strategy on the
part of Big Tech, which goes hand in hand with the construction of the
most powerful submarine megacables in the world. We only need to look at
the landing of the Dunant (Google), Amitié (Meta), Equiano (Google),
2Africa (Meta, China Mobile, MTN) and Peace (Chinese consortium) cables
on European coasts, all of which have been built in recent years. And if
these giant cables are the \"roads\" that transport data and software,
data centers are the digital \"counters\" of this territorial expansion.
These infrastructures are relays of major technological dependence on
Big Tech, whose management of data and software remains out of the
control of the European decision-maker, regulator and user. Ultimately,
this consolidation of dependencies weighs heavily on our negotiation
capacities with our \"American friend\". This infrastructural
territorialization of Big Tech pursues several objectives. First, it is
a consolidation of the European digital market on the cloud, with the
idea that the location of data on the territory is a guarantee that they
will not be transmitted to Big Tech. But the establishment of data
centers in Europe also prepares the ground for the conquest of a new
market: the \"digital transformation\" of the African continent.
Colossal energy and water burden In this new battle, which pits American
and Chinese companies against each other, Europe plays the role of
launch pad and conciliatory partner by welcoming the digital counters of
Big Tech on its territory. Finally, this geographical dissemination of
data infrastructures makes it possible to distribute the colossal energy
and water burden of these installations, by taking advantage of the
resources available in the different market territories. The
establishment of data infrastructures will indeed pose more and more
problems of management of electricity and water resources. Digital
infrastructures are energy-intensive, and inevitably weigh on local
distribution networks. Whatever the cooling techniques used by data
centers, the proper functioning of these installations will always be
strongly linked to fluctuations in the outside temperature. Thus, public
actors, who see the arrival of these projects as an interesting
financial windfall, are embarking on a risky enterprise by committing
their territory in the long term. The impact of these opportunistic
collaborations on resources could well give rise to increasingly
significant tensions, the first victims of which will be local residents
and ecosystems. While data centers and supercomputers play an important
role in the operation of artificial intelligence (AI) systems, the
massification of these new uses could have very concrete consequences on
the territories. Because, yes, AI accessible to all is a dream that
continues to the detriment of the planet. Article 15 of the text that
will be put to the vote on June 11 gives the State the possibility of
bypassing local authority, and comes at a time when the first conflicts
on the subject are emerging, and when communities in Ile-de-France,
Marseille or Brittany are trying, precisely, to better supervise and
regulate the implementation of these digital infrastructures on their
territory. However, many possibilities are available to us, and all that
is missing is the political will to break away from technological
dependence on monopolistic players. A territorial network of better
distributed and smaller data centers, belonging to European technical
players, would be much more effective in safeguarding our interests and
managing resources. In IT development, and more generally in science,
there is neither fatalism nor nationality. Political delay A real
industrial strategy is necessary, both on a national and European scale.
After all, the C++ and PHP languages were created by Danes, Python by a
Dutchman, the Web by a Briton. MP3 was German, Skype Swedish-Danish, VLC
French. Open source solutions are mature and available to replace the
majority of dominant technologies. There is no \"delay\", only political
efforts to be made to push research and industries here and there. Only
political maturity is still lagging behind... A legal framework to
reduce the effects of monopolies and the control over resources is also
necessary. The hybrid model of companies associating Big Tech with local
players -- as is the case for the Bleu project managed by Orange and
CapGemini, but which is based on Microsoft technology, or S3NS, which is
based on Google technology -- is just another ploy to maintain a status
quo where Big Tech retains exclusive control over technology. At the
same time, the leaders in the data center market, the American companies
Equinix and Digital Realty, are listed real estate investment companies
that benefit from tax advantages based on profitability mechanisms
incompatible with the general interest and the rational management of
the territory's resources. It is never too late to break the chains of
dependency, but the wait-and-see attitude and sometimes fatalism make
the task more difficult and the path winding. And while the subject of
digital independence is absent from the European debates, it is
nevertheless up to politicians to give the signal and build a favorable
framework.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1734

This is, hands down, the tech topic of the year. AI this, AI that.
Microsoft, Intel, and PC makers have all jumped on the bandwagon. You
might want to do the same. But how do you buy artificial intelligence? C
The short answer: it takes preparation. You don't buy a PC in 2024 like
you did five years ago! That said, maybe in 2024, you won't be buying a
PC. Already, an abnormally high volume of PCs and phones of the year
were sold between 2021 and 2023. The remote work brought on by the
pandemic has forced many people to upgrade their equipment, including
the probably beige, maybe gray, computer that was gathering dust in the
basement until now. Even so, if you're shopping for a piece of computing
equipment, prepare to be disoriented. This promises to be a fascinating
exercise, as Charles Tisseyre would say. So much so that it would
deserve a report in Découverte, of the type \"immersion in the
little-known world of PCs, a unique ecosystem\". If you plan to buy a PC
this year, prepare yourself to compare characteristics that you knew
nothing about before this spring. In fact, it is not out of the question
that you will seriously ask a salesperson something like: \"How many
TOPS should my PC\'s NPU be capable of to manage the tokens of the LLM
that helps me illustrate my PowerPoint presentation?\" LLM LLMs are the
large language models developed by tech giants like Google and Meta, but
also OpenAI, from the big data that they have been collecting left and
right for years. These are probabilistic systems trained with incredible
precision to write what would be the right answer to your question, or
to guess what is hidden behind the object that you want to erase from
your photos. The best-known LLMs are OpenAI's GPT, Meta's LLaMa, and
Google's PaLM, but there are several others. Most of them are available
on the Internet, in the form of open source software. You can download
an LLM for free onto your own computer from an online repository like
the one from the company Hugging Face. You will then have your own
personal dialog, or your own tool for generating images or videos from a
piece of text. There are also lightweight language models, called SLMs.
These could one day embody the famous personal AI assistant that the
tech giants dream of. TOPS To work well, both LLMs and SLMs need
context. For example, 1500 pages of documents in PDF format. If you ask
Copilot to summarize what is said in 1,500 pages of text about a stock
price, the AI must first determine whether what interests you is the
variation of a listed stock or the quality of a college education on
speculative investing. Establishing this context requires taking into
account thousands, if not millions, of criteria. For AI, in English,
these criteria are called tokens. An AI that can take into account
millions of these tokens will produce an answer better adapted to the
context of your question. Obviously, the more criteria there are to
consider, the more processing power the AI needs. The faster it has to
respond, the more instantaneous this power must be. Hence the
importance, these days, of TOPS, or trillions of operations per second
(a trillion in English is worth a trillion in French, or a thousand
billion). An AI PC can perform dozens of TOPS. To become a Copilot+ PC,
it must perform at least 40 TOPS. NPU The easiest way for AI
applications on PCs to be faster is to make the graphics processor, the
GPU, work in addition to the CPU (central processing unit). Hence the
huge and very recent commercial success of Nvidia, which sells its GPUs
like hotcakes. GPUs are its specialty. Except that GPUs are primarily
used to feed images to your PC monitor. Manufacturers have therefore
derived a new processor called a neural processor, called an NPU. It is
a simplified GPU to consume less energy. Windows sometimes recognizes
NPUs as graphics processors without display capabilities... These days,
the crux of the matter for processor manufacturers, Intel, AMD or ARM,
and even Apple, Google and Microsoft (who design their own chips without
manufacturing them themselves), is to have the most powerful combination
of CPU, GPU and NPU, to execute AI tasks as quickly as possible. Is this
necessary? So here\'s how to shop for your AI: make sure your PC\'s NPU
and GPU can perform enough TOPS to satisfy your LLM\'s token
requirements. At this point, anyone at the OQLF reading this would be
having a stroke. So are the days when a good PC was simply the one with
the most RAM or the best battery life are over? Maybe not. Most
consumers won\'t need an AI PC, especially if your job involves
retouching photos several times a day, editing videos, or synthesizing
tons of technical documents. If Minesweeper is your favorite
application, or if the biggest calculation you do on your PC is filling
out your tax return, AI is of no use to you. Which is a shame, really.
An AI capable of doing taxes would be a revolution\...

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1735

It\'s been two years since Alexis Jubert and his teams really looked
into artificial intelligence (AI). Since then, the CEO of tombstone
manufacturer GPG Granit has acquired some convictions. \"You learn by
testing,\" he recalls. \"But the important thing is to base yourself on
your own data and remain very vigilant about ethics.\" It was six months
after taking over GPG Granit, where he had worked for seven years, that
he opened this project. \"Previously, the company has always been
innovative in digital. We were the first to offer a 3D configurator
allowing families to design their monuments,\" explains the manager.
Based in Saint-Jacques-de-la-Lande, near Rennes (Ille-et-Vilaine), GPG
Granit works with 1,200 funeral directors and marble workers in France
and Belgium. It has a turnover of 30 million euros. A keen reader and
conference attendee on AI, Alexis Jubert first wondered about the areas
in which he could use it. \"There was no reluctance from the
employees,\" he explains. \"When the project was brought up, they also
needed to understand what could be done with this technology.\" A
subscription to ChatGPT Enterprise was taken out for \$20 per month.
Each employee had access to it and was able to take initiatives for a
year to lighten certain tasks. The marketing department used ChatGPT to
write articles to improve GPG Granit\'s SEO on the internet. For its
part, the finance department created an intelligent agent capable of
communicating market information to it. Human resources used it to
design job descriptions, while during this period, the company grew from
60 to 80 employees. The IT services department, made up of three people,
created two in-house applications: one to create posters for customers,
the other to facilitate the management of customer gifts. Finally, the
sales representatives: they had previously filled out an Excel
spreadsheet so that GPG Granit could fulfil its tax declaration
obligations. \"With the new, very intuitive application, designed in
three days, the operation went from two to three minutes per customer to
ten seconds thanks to the file developed which is filled in
automatically\", says Alexis Jubert. These tests, which have helped to
acculturate the company to AI, have also had their share of surprises.
When initially asked about the creation of funeral monuments, ChatGPT
only produced Anglo-Saxon models that were unsuitable for the French
market. \"It is essential to be in the personalization of the
intelligent agent based on elements specific to the company\", points
out the CEO. During the project meetings that bring together the members
of the AI committee that he set up, he also realized that employees were
providing ChatGPT with information that was sensitive enough not to take
the risk of it then circulating on the internet. \"I stopped the
experiment in the field of finance and the fact of citing people in our
job descriptions also posed a problem in terms of personal data
protection,\" he says. For two months, the AI experiment has entered a
second phase. \"We have understood the environment. Now, we have to be
autonomous by creating our own AI universe.\" His computer scientists
have used open source \"large language models\" (LLM), or specific AI
databases, to create tools that meet the needs of the company. One of
them, for example, the intelligent agent called Sailor, provides a
summary of the latest quotes, orders and interactions with a customer in
five seconds. \"The data must be well structured, otherwise you create
errors,\" notes Alexis Jubert. The investment? \"Man-time, since my IT
specialists devote 30% to 40% of their activity to it, having used free
AI models until now,\" emphasizes Alexis Jubert. He has ruled out the
idea of using consultants. \"They don\'t teach us anything more than
what we already know,\" he believes. The difficulty with AI is that the
extent of its potential remains unknown. We probably haven\'t even
achieved 5% of what we could do with it.\" Soon, GPG Granit will have
its own environment, \"with the creation of intelligent agents adapted
to our businesses, for each department, while maintaining a certain
confidentiality.\" The manager sees this as a way to better promote the
businesses to create value. \"My dream,\" he confides, \"would be for
each employee to have their own intelligent agent to be more
efficient.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1736

The Transition Accelerator and the Energy Modelling Hub, two initiatives
led by the Trottier Energy Institute at Polytechnique Montréal, are
playing a key role in decarbonizing the Canadian economy. "The
transformation of the energy system that we are embarking on as a
society is the fastest we have ever seen," exclaims Edouard Clément,
Executive Director of the Energy Modelling Hub. "There is momentum in
Canada, with the largest investments in energy." By 2030, Canada has
committed to reducing its greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 40 to 45%
below 2005 levels. To decarbonize the Canadian economy, the federal
government is adopting a series of measures, such as the new Clean
Electricity Regulations. But two challenges were hindering the energy
transition, according to Mr. Clément. First, the lack of communication
between the provinces and Ottawa, as well as between the various federal
bodies such as Natural Resources Canada, Environment Canada or the
Canada Energy Regulator. Second, the lack of precise and up-to-date
models to make the best decisions for the energy transition. In the
United Kingdom, California or Sweden, decision-makers can rely on
organizations specializing in modeling, continues the expert. In Canada,
such structures were absent... until recently, with the creation of the
Energy Modeling Hub and the Transition Accelerator. Models to align
"There are several ways to achieve decarbonization," explains Edouard
Clément. Some are more expensive, some have greater social acceptability
or different technology needs. Using data for decision-making is super
important. We have the data; now we need to be able to analyze it."
Modeling makes it possible to predict what the effects of different
strategies will be on different indicators such as GDP, employment or
the development of new technology sectors. Thanks to complex
mathematical calculations, these models make it possible to more
accurately assess the actions to prioritize according to different
parameters. In 2023, for example, Hydro-Québec announced its intention
to double the province\'s energy capacity by 2050 to successfully
complete its energy transition. \"We need to model technologies. If we
implement this or that type of technology, here is what it requires in
terms of electricity,\" illustrates Normand Mousseau, professor of
physics and scientific director of the Trottier Energy Institute.
\"Modeling is, in my opinion, an essential tool for knowing where we are
going. We are trying to identify technically and economically viable
trajectories,\" adds Éloïse Edom, researcher at the Trottier Energy
Institute. She actively worked on the Energy Modeling Initiative
launched in 2019 by the Institute. A little over two years later, based
on the Initiative, the Energy Modelling Hub was launched with a \$5
million investment from Natural Resources Canada. It is a pan-Canadian,
non-partisan network of energy and electricity modellers, led by three
universities: Polytechnique Montréal, the University of Calgary and the
University of Victoria. "The idea was to create a group to centralize
expertise and models and to ensure that people talk to each other,"
explains Edouard Clément. "We develop models, tools and visualization
platforms that are open source. We train the community with workshops.
We bring together model developers and decision-makers. We provided data
to support the recommendations in the next report of the Canadian
Electricity Advisory Board," he lists. A methodical transition "How can
we think about the transition from a methodological point of view?"
states Normand Mousseau to summarize the approach of the two
organizations he helped found. After co-directing the Energy Modeling
Initiative, he is co-scientific director of the Energy Modeling Hub and
senior advisor on transition trajectories at the Transition Accelerator,
created five years ago. "We will work with more specific economic
sectors to determine how we structure strategic approaches on the ground
to advance decarbonization," explains Mr. Mousseau about the
Accelerator's mission. "We rely on a methodology that will identify the
problems, the actors, and local trajectories that may be different from
one region to another." We built a strategy that brings hundreds of
companies together to discuss how to move forward strategically."
Normand Mousseau gives as an example the creation of a hydrogen hub in
Alberta, co-led by the Accelerator and funded, among others, by the
Alberta government. Transportation, buildings, critical materials,
electricity, economy, biofuels: the list of sectors involved in the
energy transition is long. And despite the progress, Mr. Mousseau points
out, Canada must continue to use the accelerator to achieve its GHG
reduction targets. "Using data for decision-making is super important.
We have the data; now we need to be able to analyze it." Thanks to
complex mathematical calculations, modeling makes it possible to
accurately assess the actions to prioritize in terms of energy
transition, according to different parameters. GETTY IMAGES

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1737

Meredith Whittaker, president of the Signal Foundation, which supports
the development of the messaging service of the same name, is a former
Google employee and a specialist in the ethics of artificial
intelligence, online privacy and Internet governance. Based in Paris for
a few months, she is participating in the VivaTech trade show, held from
May 22 to 25. For the past few days, the founder of the Telegram
messaging service, Pavel Durov, and the owner of the social network X,
Elon Musk, have been suggesting -- without proof -- that Signal contains
vulnerabilities in its encryption system... What do you say to them? In
the United States, we have a word for that: "bullshit". It is dangerous
to make such statements about a technology that represents a
life-or-death issue for many users: human rights defenders, journalists,
their sources, whistleblowers, people fleeing authoritarian regimes...
If they want to attack Signal, let them do it! But without denigrating a
technology that has been verified and validated for over a decade,
because it is open source. In France, the Minister of the Interior,
Gérald Darmanin, would like to allow law enforcement to access encrypted
content. European police forces are saying the same thing. Does that
worry you? For decades, politicians have been dreaming of a magic wand
that would allow them to access encrypted content without compromising
the security of communications, useful for human rights defenders but
also businesses, governments, etc. Unfortunately, there is no magic
wand. The gap between these political desires and technical realities is
huge. Their argument is that encryption harms investigations, prevents
access to evidence, etc. What do you say? These arguments have existed
for decades and persist, although our era is experiencing unprecedented
mass surveillance. Law enforcement has never had access to so much data.
To the point that it poses a problem for them, because they have to be
able to process it. France has just blocked TikTok in New Caledonia,
which has been in the throes of riots for a few days\... What do you
think? I don\'t know the context well, but in 2024, blocking access to a
social network in order to regain control of a territory seems very
dated\... This decision resembles that of an authoritarian regime and is
not suitable for a democracy. In Europe, the Digital Markets Act, which
came into force in March, imposes interoperability of messaging
services. So, if I use WhatsApp or Facebook Messenger, I should be able
to communicate with a Signal user\... Is this a good thing? In theory
yes, because we are faced with a few tech giants that control the
communication infrastructure. But it is complicated to implement. We
will refuse interoperability with any messaging service if it does not
respect our privacy standards. Of course, the Signal encryption
protocol, which we created and which protects the content of messages,
is now used by WhatsApp or Google. But we go further, by also protecting
the name of the people you speak to, the time and the number of messages
sent. We would love for everyone to adopt these standards. We challenge
the entire industry to live up to them. For you, AI only reinforces this
domination of the tech giants, and the concentration of their power...
It is worth remembering that the notion of AI became popular in the
2010s, when two resources became widely available: data and computing
power. They made neural networks, an old AI technology, efficient. This
proved useful in the eyes of players like Google or Facebook, to sell
ever more advertising. The current search for ever more powerful AI
reinforces the concentration of power in the hands of these companies.
Because they are the ones who have the data necessary for AI. And the
computing power. And the means to offer AI on the market, through
platforms like Google, Instagram or YouTube, and the clouds. In your
opinion, this dominance of Big Tech has an impact on the type of AI
developed and on the public to which they are actually addressed...
Training an AI model like GPT-3 would cost 100 million dollars \[92.5
million euros\]... Only very rich players can deploy these systems on a
large scale. And they must then be able to sell them, to make a profit.
So, this idea that we are all users of AI is false. We can already see
that the big customers are mainly powerful people: governments, states,
law enforcement or large economic players, who decide to introduce these
systems into the manufacturing process at the risk of degrading work.
They are the ones who determine the use of these systems. Workers are
not the users: they are the subjects. Can European AI start-ups like
Mistral AI offer an alternative to the digital giants? Yes, on one of
the elements of the AI value chain, the manufacturing of models, but
they are not direct competitors of these companies. These start-ups, for
example, still need, for computing, to use the infrastructures of
Nvidia, Google or Amazon... Access to the market necessarily goes
through these players. Many politicians in Europe cling to this fantasy
that it would suddenly be possible to create a giant, a European
Microsoft or Google. But because of the nature of these monopolies,
which combine platforms and infrastructures, and are self-reinforcing,
this seems impossible. So what should be done? We can move towards
smaller AI models. We could also separate the application layer (such as
search engines, social networks, etc.) from the infrastructure layer
(such as computing power), for example, by regulating. We could also
impose ways of creating and collecting data legally, which do not fuel
surveillance and targeted advertising. This could be done with the
General Data Protection Regulation, which was created precisely to
impose the consent of Europeans on the processing of their data... Yes.
Often, Europe has very good rules on paper, but these come up against
their application, in particular because of the millions of dollars
spent on lobbying by the digital giants in Brussels. It is an uphill
battle. But I believe that there is an opportunity here for European
political leaders to show the way with a strong decision, which would be
popular with the public. In 2018, when you were at Google, you protested
against Project Maven, which aimed to analyze drone images using AI for
the American army. Do you believe in the possibility of an international
treaty that bans autonomous weapons? It is our moral duty to call for a
ban and to combat the use of these systems. They apply the same
imprecise and biased logic as advertising targeting, to determine who to
kill. There is a huge amount of money that used to go to the historical
suppliers of American defense, going to big tech players. And we are
seeing the reappearance of "cold war" discourses, about the conflict
between the United States and China or about the arms race with AI...
It's worrying.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1738

A star can be defined by the light it gives off. This is as true in
astronomy as in entertainment. No need to have seen its films or
listened to its music, a real star, everyone knows it. In the business
world, very few companies achieve this fame. Electronics company Nvidia
has entered this very exclusive club. All stock market analysts awaited
the publication of its quarterly results with as much anxiety, if not
more, than the American inflation or employment figures. Because this
company, still unknown to the general public five years ago, represents
all the hopes of a new industrial revolution bringing growth to the
United States. And these results did not disappoint. The manufacturer of
chips for artificial intelligence announced, on Wednesday, May 22, a
262% increase in its turnover for its last fiscal quarter, to 26 billion
dollars (24 billion euros). A 3.5-fold increase in sales compared to the
same period in 2023, which was already up 265% compared to 2022. Better
than Google or Amazon Equally spectacular, the company\'s net profit
amounted to \$15 billion over the same three months, a profit margin of
over 57%. And it\'s not over yet, since Nvidia\'s founder,
Taiwanese-American Jensen Huang, promised that this rate of growth would
continue in 2024 and probably the next few years. As a result, the
company\'s stock market valuation should climb even higher than the
current \$2,300 billion. Better than Google or Amazon. Like a passing of
the torch. The first computer revolution was driven, in the 1960s and
1980s, by the hegemony of IBM, that of the microcomputer, between 1980
and 2000, by Microsoft and Intel, and the next, that of the Internet and
mobile, by Google and Apple. The age of artificial intelligence will be
driven by the duopoly formed by OpenAI and Nvidia. In the interconnected
world of digital, the winner takes all, because it creates the standard
and its investment means make it difficult to catch up. According to
analysts at Citi bank, quoted by the Financial Times, Nvidia\'s market
share exceeds 80% and would still be over 60% in 2030. However, it does
not manufacture its chips, produced by the Taiwanese TSMC. Its rivals
(AMD, Intel, Qualcomm) and its major customers (Google, Microsoft, Meta
or Apple) all work on their own system. But the software environment he
built over twenty years, called CUDA, will be very difficult to
replicate because it is so efficient and locks the client into their
habits. Like Google, Microsoft or Apple did with theirs. To make up for
lost time, almost all of them are banking on opensource software, which
anyone can improve, called Triton, designed by the Frenchman Philippe
Tillet during his doctorate at Harvard. He has since been hired by
OpenAI. But getting back on track will take time, until the next
cycle...

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1739

If we want to spread AI and reap all the benefits, we need shared use
and therefore an open, fair and transparent AI model. We will have to
defend this model in an international dialogue.\" While the business and
tech world is celebrating the artificial intelligence revolution at the
Viva Tech trade show this week, Emmanuel Macron wanted to make his mark.
The President of the Republic, who wants to make France a key leader in
these technologies, will organize the next world AI summit on February
10 and 11, 2025. Ahead of this event, he intends to promote the \"French
touch\". This will be done in particular through the Democratic Commons,
a global research program supported by the public authorities. Initiated
by Make.org, Sciences Po, Sorbonne University and the CNRS, it aims to
make open-source generative AI solutions available to serve democracy.
For two years, more than 50 researchers and engineers will work on
solutions for evaluating and correcting bias in AI systems to ensure
their responsible use. Among the experts who will supervise this project
are the French start-up Hugging Face as well as NGOs and foundations
such as Mozilla.ai and the Aspen Institute. \"In an increasingly
polarized world, where technologies such as AI are often used by those
who want to take advantage of the flaws in our open societies to
exacerbate divisions, this French initiative is proud to bring an
alternative and positive vision of a technology at the service of
democracy,\" says the NGO make.org. Several voices agree, in fact, that
the issues surrounding AI technologies cannot be addressed solely
through a technical or legal prism, and that it is now impossible to
ignore the impact on our democracies in light of the observed excesses.
A handful of actors Some compare the rise of AI to the rise of social
networks. \"One of the lessons we can learn from the last twenty years
is that a race against time between players that ignores the impact on
society is not the best practice,\" says Mitchell Baker, executive
director of the Mozilla Foundation, while in Paris. \"It generates
income for shareholders, but it harms our value systems. Civil society
wants more transparency and collaboration in the construction of these
technologies. It also asks the major players in AI to engage in the
debate around the principles that should govern the development of these
technologies. These companies have understood that it is in their
interest to take part, particularly in terms of image.\" At a time when
regulators must deal with the acceleration of the pace of innovation as
well as the rise of dangers including deepfakes, sixteen tech giants
(Meta, Google, OpenAI, Alibaba, etc.) have once again made commitments
on the sidelines of a global summit on AI that took place this week in
South Korea. This does not prevent many observers, such as the Mozilla
Foundation, from denouncing the \"concentration\" of AI technologies in
the hands of a small number of players. \"When we talk about language
models and systems that are supposed to replicate human intelligence,
synthesize ideas for us, imitate our voices, this poses a problem. We
need greater diversity.\" The question of more equitable access to these
technologies is also being raised today. According to the NGO, this must
involve a commitment from public authorities to create \"robust
infrastructures (data centers, etc.) and the provision of large volumes
of data and computing power to train language models.\" A way to bring
out other champions alongside the giants. KL

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1740

Recruiters must be very careful in their online searches. While they are
now thinking about ways to optimize their search for the \"rare pearl\",
or even the \"five-legged sheep\", thanks to the new possibilities
offered by artificial intelligence (AI), a recent decision by the Court
of Cassation reminds them that not all means are good and, first and
foremost, that personal data belongs only to its owner. A decision by
the Court of Cassation on April 30 has in fact just overturned the
appeal of the conviction of a detective to a one-year suspended prison
sentence and a €20,000 fine for having collected personal data freely
accessible on the Internet, but in an unfair manner. This ruling is the
latest episode in the so-called \"Ikea employee spying\" case, which
resulted in a €1 million fine for the French subsidiary of the Swedish
furniture company in 2021 and prison sentences for thirteen of its
executives. The brand had then set up a system for investigating its
employees and job applicants in several of its stores in the 2000s and
then in the 2010s. In his appeal proceedings, the incriminated detective
defended himself against the \"unfair\" nature of the collection of
personal data, since in response to the request of the sponsoring
company, he had identified \"information made public in the press or
information publicly disseminated by a person on a social network (open
source data)\". His searches concerned information such as criminal
records, banking and telephone information, vehicles, properties, tenant
or owner status, marital status, health, travel abroad. A profiling that
went well beyond the information usually exchanged during a job
interview. Googling a future recruit is not prohibited, but the
transmission of their information to the human resources manager is
precisely regulated and the data must be \"collected and processed in a
fair and lawful manner\", specifies the Data Protection Act. This is the
point on which the Court of Cassation ruled, describing the means of
collection as \"unfair in employer-employee relations\". All the
employees\' information was certainly taken from public sites, such as
websites, directories, discussion forums, social networks, regional
press sites, as the defendant himself explained during his
interrogations, but it \"was used in a way that was unrelated to the
purpose for which it was put online and was collected without the
knowledge of the persons concerned, thus depriving them of the right to
object established by the Data Protection Act\", states the judgment of
30 April. The right to object allows anyone to refuse the processing of
their data, whether it be collection, storage, adaptation or
modification, extraction, consultation, use, communication by
transmission, dissemination or any other form of making available.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1741

From the President\'s pay slips to public school sponsorship agreements,
the Commission for Access to Administrative Documents aims to make it
easier for everyone to consult them. But faced with the lack of
information from government officials and persistent opacity, citizens
are struggling to \"remove barriers as much as possible.\" Here it is in
the flesh (or almost): the President of the Republic\'s pay slip L. In
January, Emmanuel Macron received €14,586.32 net before tax - for a
\"full-time\" job, the document specifies. The scoop is not so much the
amount, already known, as the pay slip itself. Xavier Berne, who
initiated the request, is still stunned. All it took was an email to the
Elysée and two months of patience. This former journalist is at the helm
of Ma Dada (for \"request for access to administrative documents\"), an
associative platform aimed at simplifying their consultation. He
sometimes sends requests in his own name, \"for educational purposes, to
show that it is possible.\" Yes, because there is a slight gap between
the law and the way the State applies it to itself. In reality,
Macron\'s pay slip obtained today is the spoils of an old melee, started
in 2020 by a teacher-researcher from the Observatory of Public Ethics
who wanted to verify the concrete changes to the method of calculating
the 2012 compensation system. Refusal by the chief of staff of the
Elysée, who persisted, believing that the control was the responsibility
of the Court of Auditors. And that therefore, \"under these conditions,
the communication of the requested documents appears useless for your
research work.\" Stunned by such a response, which in passing called
into question the freedom of teacher-researchers, Lucie Sponchiado had
taken the matter to the administrative judge to force the Elysée to give
in. \"In principle: the duty of transparency applies to everyone,
including the President and the Prime Minister,\" she insists. Two years
later, a motorcycle courier wearing white gloves rang her doorbell with
the facsimile in an envelope. The Elysée is therefore on the road to
progress: to respond to Xavier Berne, the administration contented
itself with a registered letter. A FEW \"JOKER\" TO REFUSE The
Declaration of the Rights of Man of 1789 is clear: \"Society has the
right to demand an account of his administration from any public
agent.\" A 1978 law organizes the matter: any document produced or
received by the State, local authorities, associations and private
companies in the context of a public service mission is communicable. A
huge source: for example, it is possible to request the contract between
the water management company and your city, the air quality analyses at
the RATP, the expense reports of a mayor and his deputies. On the other
side, the administration still has a few \"jokers\" to refuse. Such as
the status of \"unfinished\" documents quickly drawn, the secrecy of
certain deliberations (notably those of the Council of Ministers). Or
even the business secrecy invoked in the context of public contracts for
example. In 1978, the legislator set up an institution to play the
mediator. It is the famous Commission for Access to Administrative
Documents (Cada), with its 21 agents, including managers. Normally, its
vocation is to intervene only on thorny requests, on the edge of the
law. In fact, it is overwhelmed with referrals - more than 10,000 last
year, an increase of 46% in six years. There are two ways of reading
this evolution. In a glass half full, this is proof that more and more
citizens are taking advantage of their rights. The picture is less rosy:
these appeals are mainly a symptom of an administration that is
reluctant to be transparent and sometimes drags its feet. Xavier Berne
has his eye on the meter: in more than eight out of ten cases, the
administration does not respond within the month allowed by law. Not
even an acknowledgement of receipt. \"There is such inertia. I often say
it: if the law were applied, a platform like Ma Dada would not exist,\"
he believes. This associative project was born a little before the
lockdown, \"a little on a whim,\" says Laurent Savaëte, one of the
co-founders. While doing research on public funding for companies, this
engineer discovered by chance the English platform What-DoTheyKnow which
simplifies document requests. With two friends from the Open Knowledge
France association, he stole the source code (in complete legality, it
is free software). Fifteen days of \"hard work\" later, Ma Dada was up
and running. The site, which is free, offers a pre-filled form. All you
have to do is enter the exact title of the document and the targeted
administration (50,000 addresses are registered). \"The idea is to
remove as many barriers as possible. There is a glaring lack of
knowledge of the law, which has existed for forty-five years in France,
whereas it is a very active right in England, for example. Who knows in
our country that they can ask questions of the State?\" adds the
engineer. Ma Dada has only had 1,350 users since its launch. Lack of
knowledge of the law is not the only obstacle. Laurent Savaëte talks
about this other barrier to overcome, which is more difficult and higher
than he initially imagined: the difficulty of getting the administration
to comply with the law. \"THERE REMAINS A CULTURE OF SECRECY\" The
nature of the appeals before the Cada illustrates this well: 40% do not
present any legal difficulty, the doctrine having been established for
ages. The Secretary General of the Cada, Hélène Servent, is the first to
regret these \"unjustified referrals\" which pile up on her agents\'
desks, and waste everyone\'s time. Because by ricochet, the Cada does
not respect the law either. In principle, it must rule within a month.
\"We have managed to get down to fifty-two days on average, we were at
six months in 2019\", pleads the Secretary General. Hélène Servent would
like to paint a brighter picture; insists on the progress, in particular
the appointments of Mr. and Mrs. Transparency (the Pradas) within many
administrations. \"But it is true, I note it and deplore it, that there
remains a culture of secrecy in certain administrations\", concedes the
Secretary General. Partly due to ignorance, she says: \"We conduct a lot
of training for agents. Some still think that a request is not
admissible if the applicant does not demonstrate an interest in
acting.\" She knows the harmful effects. This suspicion that creeps in
when an administrator, requesting transparency, finds himself in front
of closed doors. For example, when the management of the École
Polytechnique, which trains the country\'s elite, refuses to communicate
the content of sponsorship agreements made with companies (see page 4),
ignoring the opinion of the Cada and the administrative court. Contacted
by Libération, the school invoked business confidentiality, \"when these
contracts are concluded with private individuals who operate in a
competitive environment.\" \"In the current climate, we need access to
raw information more than ever,\" says Noël Lucia, an activist at France
Nature Environnement. \"It\'s the only way to get out of fantasies.\"
TWISTING THE MINISTRY\'S ARM This was also the basis of the Lemaire law
of 2016, with the open data project. Administrations must, of their own
accord, make datasets available. More than 40,000 are online on the
data.gouv.fr website, classified by theme: housing, energy, health,
education, public accounts \"This law is a real step forward,\" notes
the vice-president of the Observatory of Public Ethics, Jean-Christophe
Kerléo. He would have liked to stick to a wave but the reality is less
sunny. \"We could have imagined that with this text, the number of
appeals before the Cada would dry up. Not at all.\" This will also be
the theme of their next conference, at the end of May. \"These datasets
are not always easy to read and use, unless you are a professional.
Making them available also requires resources within administrations:
the forces are often lacking. Finally, the data put online is rarely the
data that interests the citizens.\" Sometimes it takes pressure and the
stubbornness of a few people. Often, seasoned activists or journalists.
This was the case, for example, in the spring of 2023 for the
publication of social position indices, which demonstrated the decline
in social diversity in many schools. Journalist Alexandre Léchenet,
co-founder of the Association of Journalists for Transparency, fought
for three years to twist the ministry\'s arm. Or more recently, for the
posting of all court decisions online: the Ouvre-boîte association,
established since 2017, had shaken the coconut tree. \"We are half a
dozen active members,\" says Michel Blancard, one of the founders. We
make requests on subjects of general interest, sensitive and which
suggest that the fight will be long.\" In the vast majority of cases,
the Cada decides in favour of the communication of data (only 9% of
referrals have an unfavourable opinion), but the administration does not
always give in. The only coercive means is then to turn to the
administrative court. In practice, 5% of Cada appeals end up before the
judge. \"Often because people do not dare,\" says Michel Blancard. \"The
justice system intimidates. Perhaps also because you have to write a
brief. I would like to get this message across: it is entirely
feasible.\" But it is long. Sometimes you have to wait years for the
judgment. ?

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1742

On this side of the Atlantic, billionaire Frank McCourt is best known to
football fans for being the owner of OM since 2016. Descendant of a
family of entrepreneurs, the president of McCourt Global is nevertheless
at the head of a group that brings together activities in the real
estate, sports, technology, media and capital investment sectors. On the
other side of the Atlantic, his concern about the excesses of the
internet has also been public knowledge for several years. Since 2021,
Frank McCourt has launched and injected \$500 million into an initiative
called \"Project Liberty\", with the ambition of \"building a better
internet\" than the current one, which he considers \"broken\" given the
harmful consequences, particularly on health, the well-being of children
and democracy. It is in this context, and through this project, that
Frank McCourt announced on Wednesday that he was putting together an
offer to be able, when the time comes, to buy TikTok\'s American
activities. This is the first publicly declared offer since US President
Joe Biden signed a law in April requiring the Chinese group ByteDance,
TikTok\'s parent company, to sell its social network within a year to an
American buyer or risk seeing the TikTok application banned from the App
Store and Google Play Store in the United States. This is not yet a
formal offer at this stage. \"Project Liberty is organizing a consortium
to buy TikTok. We are only at the beginning, because there are still
many steps to specify in the process, in particular on the exact scope
of the activities that will be for sale, but we want to be ready when
all this becomes very concrete,\" Tomicah Tilleman, who has headed
Project Liberty since the beginning of this year, told Le Figaro. The
sale process is still far from being launched. Not only will ByteDance
challenge the US law in court, but the Chinese group indicated in late
April that it had no intention of selling, whatever the consequences.
But Frank McCourt\'s camp, which is actively talking to lawmakers in the
United States, is preparing to seize the possible opportunity. \"We said
to ourselves that this was the opportunity of a lifetime, and that it
was the right time to build a platform that aligned with our vision of
the internet, in a way that allows users to regain control over their
personal data,\" continues Tomicah Tilleman. \"We brought together a
group of financial investors, but also civil society activists, leaders
who support our approach and recognize the need to build a new model for
this type of platform,\" he says. A price still unknown Among these
partners, Guggenheim Securities, the investment bank and capital markets
of Guggenheim Partners, and the law firm Kirkland & Ellis, but also
recognized personalities, such as Sir Tim Berners-Lee, the main inventor
of the World Wide Web, or the social psychologist Jonathan Haidt, author
of a best-selling book, The Anxious Generation. \"It is too early to
discuss a price, because we do not yet know the exact scope of such a
sale, specifies Tomicah Tilleman. But we are aware that this will be a
significant financial transaction and we will be ready when the time
comes.\" How much is this video-sharing application really worth? Used
by 170 million Americans? It is difficult to answer without knowing
whether international activities will be included in addition to
American activities, or whether TikTok\'s precious algorithm would also
be for sale. Some are talking about a valuation of 100 billion dollars.
TikTok\'s American subsidiary generated \$16 billion in revenue in 2023.
At Project Liberty, the idea of working on an offer emerged even before
the law was passed, when political discussions began to crystallize
among parliamentarians around this sale option. \"We are approaching
this offer in a very different way, with motivations that are not those
of other players to perpetuate TikTok\'s existing economic model. We
want to put users back at the heart of the project,\" insists Tomicah
Tilleman. A model - common to all major platforms because it was
invented in the United States - that Frank McCourt considers responsible
for many dangerous ills for societies. \"There is a real need to adopt a
new framework. We want to follow three principles: give power back to
users, have better governance of the platform to avoid current pitfalls,
which range from manipulation to data exploitation, and distribute more
value to the community, particularly for content creators. \"This is
really key in our project,\" insists Tomicah Tilleman. The idea is not
to wipe the slate clean but to modify its architecture. \"There are very
good things in the TikTok platform as it currently works, with a lot of
dynamism, a very efficient interface and we want to keep all of that,
underlines Tomicah Tilleman. But we think that the structure and the
model must be improved to give more power and value to the community of
TikTokers.\" To do this, the consortium wants to rely in particular on a
decentralized and open source protocol developed as part of the Liberty
project, which is partly based on the blockchain (DSNP, for
\"decentralized social networking protocol\"). With this protocol, a
user must be able to change platforms by taking their contacts and all
of their content without losing everything, as they can do with their
phone number when they change operator. "A TikTok that uses open
internet protocols will embrace the core values of privacy, data
sovereignty and user mental health," says Sir Tim Berners-Lee, a strong
advocate of a decentralized internet. IV

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1743

This is the new land of conquest for the music industry. Sound like in
real life, which surrounds you and comes from where the action is taking
place. Welcome to the era of 3D audio, also called spatial or binaural
sound. Streaming platforms, record labels, audio device
manufacturers\... each wants to differentiate themselves by offering
this immersive sound. On April 11, Orange launched a new TV decoder (TV
6) compatible with Dolby Atmos. Apple Music had proposed, two months
earlier, to increase the remuneration for artists who would offer their
tracks in 3D sound, to the great fury of independent labels. If Dolby
Atmos is the most widespread spatial sound format in the world, it will
have to deal in 2024 with a newcomer: immersive sound, called IAMF
(Immersive Audio Model and Formats), which is promoted, in particular,
by Google/YouTube and Samsung in the form of free software. All the
conditions are in place for a battle of spatial sound, at a time when it
is becoming more widespread among the general public, from music to
audio books to podcasts, on all devices capable of reproducing audio, at
home, on the move, at the cinema or in concert. Navigation tool One
hundred and forty-three years after the first stereo broadcast -- the
"théâtrophone" by the Frenchman Clément Ader (1841-1925) -- and a
century after the stereophony patent -- filed by the American Franklin
Doolittle (1893-1979) --, spatial sound, with three-dimensional (3D)
effects, is becoming more widespread. Even the co-inventor of MP3,
Karlheinz Brandenburg, has succumbed to the sirens of Audio AR (another
name, which refers to augmented reality). However, spatial sound is not
new. Quadraphony, also called tetraphony, attempted a breakthrough in
analog from the 1950s to the 1970s, before being abandoned. Another
commercial failure: the Super Audio CD format for digital optical discs,
developed in the late 1990s by Sony and Philips, allowing multichannel
sound called \"surround\". With the exception of the home cinema market,
the adventure ended fifteen years ago. \"We do not think that the main
application of this technology is high fidelity, which would explain the
failure of previous attempts. Spatializing sound transforms it and some
music lovers find that it degrades it,\" explains Philippe Le Borgne,
CEO and co-founder of RunBlind, a French start-up specializing in
binaural sound used as a navigation tool to guide the user in their
movements through the music they are listening to, a technology intended
in particular for the visually impaired. Head tracking sensors are
integrated into connected headphones, glasses or earpieces. Even though
purists might see it as a sound degradation compared to hi-fi stereo,
spatial sound is about to make us forget its past failures. A multitude
of high-tech devices now have it for listening to music, podcasts or
audiobooks. The immersive three-dimensional effect adds verticality to
the horizontality of the sound (five-way multichannel, called 5.1, or
seven-way, in the case of 7.1). \"It was thanks to my AirPods wireless
headphones, capable of reproducing spatial sound, that I discovered
music in Dolby Atmos on Apple Music. Since then, I can\'t do without it.
The music literally envelops me, in \"fixed\" mode or in \"head
tracking\" - the origin of the sound is then determined according to the
orientation of my head. But the tracks are, unfortunately, not all in 3D
audio,\" says Quentin, a 25-year-old from Toulouse and a rapper in his
spare time. The iPhone maker says that \"more than 90% of Apple Music
listeners have experienced spatial audio, and music streams available in
this format have more than tripled in the last two years.\" And assures
that its Logic Pro mixing software (229.99 euros per license) allows
labels and independent artists to export their spatial audio mixes in
ADM (Dolby Atmos) files. Even in the car While there is no shortage of
3D audio formats, such as 360 Reality Audio from Japanese Sony or DTS:X
from American Xperi, it is the format launched a dozen years ago by
Dolby Laboratories, in San Francisco (California), which currently holds
the upper hand. \"Dolby Atmos is a pioneering immersive audio experience
that has been fully adopted by major device manufacturers and movie
theater operators around the world. Today, billions of devices are
equipped with it, such as smartphones, such as those from Apple and
Samsung; Sonos soundbars and connected speakers, Apple\'s HomePod,
Amazon\'s Echo Studio; televisions such as Samsung, LG or Sony;
computers or laptops from Apple, Asus, Dell or Lenovo; as well as game
consoles or DVD/Blu-ray players,\" lists John Couling, vice president of
entertainment at Dolby Laboratories. Cinema operators, such as the
American AMC or the French Pathé (formerly Pathé-Gaumont), also use
Atmos sound for thousands of theaters, to which are added hundreds of
Dolby Cinema locations - an immersive cinema concept offering Dolby
Atmos sound, Dolby Vision image and reclining seats. The world number
one in spatial sound, the American group, led for fifteen years by Kevin
Yeaman, collects significant royalties from these licensed operations.
Even the automotive sector is rolling in spatial audio, as with
Mercedes-Benz, Volvo, Polestar (Volvo\'s luxury division), Lotus, Lucid
Motors (American electric cars) and others. The rise of streaming
platforms is largely contributing to the appropriation of spatial audio.
In video on demand, Netflix, Disney+, AppleTV+, Amazon Prime Video,
Paramount+, and the Max platform (ex-HBO Max/Discovery+), which is
coming to Europe by the summer, have fallen for Atmos. The same goes for
online music with Amazon Music, Apple Music and Tidal (both Dolby Atmos
and Sony\'s 360 Reality Audio). Even Amazon\'s Audible has been
publishing audiobooks and podcasts in Atmos for a year. On the other
hand, the French platform Deezer abandoned, at the end of October 2022,
its spatial offer \"360 by Deezer\", based on a partnership with Sony,
without replacing it, contenting itself with offering hi-fi sound
without loss of quality with the FLAC (Free Lossless Audio Codec)
format, open source and free. \"We have decided to end this trial phase,
in part because of the technical and administrative challenges linked to
the maintenance of a separate music application\", explains a
spokesperson for Deezer. As for the other French platform, Qobuz (owned
by the company Xandrie), renowned for its hi-fi quality in Hi-Res
format, it had adopted THX Spatial Audio technology in August 2022. This
immersive 360-degree audio format was originally developed for the
Lucasfilm film studio, George Lucas\' company. But Qobuz ultimately gave
up on spatial sound. \"Our customers, older than the market average,
over 40, urban and CSP+, do not ask us for it,\" explains Georges
Fornay, Deputy CEO of Qobuz. A way to stand out \"In cinema and
television, all the major Hollywood studios continue to release films in
Dolby Atmos for distribution in theaters and at home. This includes some
of the biggest blockbusters of the past year such as Barbie. And, in
music, more than twenty streaming platforms and more than a thousand
recording studios have activated Dolby Atmos worldwide,\" says John
Couling at Dolby Laboratories. 3D audio allows you to stand out from
your increasingly numerous rivals. Apple Music thus adopted spatial
sound with Dolby Atmos technology in 2021 and now offers an additional
10% remuneration for titles recorded in this format, much to the dismay
of independent labels. According to the Financial Times of February 1,
the additional costs are in the order of 1,000 euros per title and
10,000 euros per album. Not everyone is Deutsche Grammophon, the doyenne
of record companies (in the hands of the major Universal Music), capable
of broadcasting classical music in Atmos (also live) on its Stage+
platform, accessible even in the Apple Vision Pro spatial headset. Often
accused of not paying artists enough, will other music streaming
platforms follow Apple in this area? Impala (Independent Music Companies
Association), of which nearly six thousand labels are members, has
stepped up to the plate. For this association based in Brussels, \"the
spatial coupling and royalties will have negative consequences for
certain parts of the music industry, in particular for independent
labels and their artists.\" This measure, taken unilaterally by the
Cupertino (California) company, \"inevitably results in a reduction in
income for those who cannot access it, which worsens the impact on
independents\", believes Impala, which counts the Union of Independent
French Phonographic Producers (UPFI) among its members. Impala President
Helen Smith hopes that the meeting planned for April with the
Californian company will make her change her mind. \"Significant
progress\" In its previous financial year, ending at the end of
September 2023, the leader Dolby Laboratories achieved almost all of its
turnover with all of its audio or video formats, which reached nearly
1.3 billion dollars (1.2 billion euros), an increase of 3.6% over one
year. Its catalog consists of some 20,000 international patents, which
have ensured it a net profit of 200.6 million dollars in 2023. Its
market capitalization is approaching 7.5 billion dollars. However, in
this high-demand market, Dolby Laboratories is facing much more powerful
players, such as the Japanese Sony and especially Google. A new spatial
audio format could indeed change the game: IAMF, promoted by the
Alliance for Open Media, chaired by Matt Frost, product director at
Google. Unlike the lucrative Dolby Atmos, IAMF is free and open source
(royalty-free). This new 3D sound technology will be available later
this year on Samsung televisions and Google products (such as YouTube).
\"IAMF represents a significant advance in open immersive audio
standards. Not only does it address a variety of use cases, including
streaming, gaming, AR, VR, and broadcast, but this open-source software
will also provide creators with the tools to create immersive audio
experiences that captivate audiences, says Matt Frost. As an open media
project, IAMF is easily accessible to integrators around the world; it
fosters innovation, empowers developers, and ensures the broad
availability of rich, immersive audio experiences that consumers want.
\"Just as stereo did, 3D sound is set to become more mainstream, and
many audio content will be unable to escape it. Like sound\'s revenge in
a world of omnipresent images.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1744

As the fine weather approaches, a hint of worry invades Christophe
Mathon. For the mayor of the village of Saint-Montan, a medieval town of
180 inhabitants nestled in the confines of the Ardèche, the coming
months do not look like they will be easy. Between April and October,
every weekend and during school holidays, an uninterrupted flow of
vehicles pours into his region, popular with tourists. At the exit of
the A7, near Montélimar, many motorists heading for the Ardèche gorges
then take the D262 departmental road, a road that passes through the
main square of the village. \"At this time of year, we can see up to
1,000 cars per day,\" swears Christophe Mathon. \"Our streets are not
adapted to handle such traffic. Buses and semi-trailers have already
found themselves stuck and have been forced to reverse. These maneuvers
create monstrous traffic jams. The inhabitants are suffering from the
situation, and some of them even leave at the beginning of the summer
season. On the road leading to the village, signs indicate other routes,
but people blindly let themselves be guided by their GPS. All this to
save a few minutes. \"Suggesting the fastest route is exactly the
mission that the Waze application has set itself. The motto of the firm
created in 2008 in Israel is clear: \"Outsmart traffic together\".
Unlike its competitors TomTom, Sygic or Plans, Waze is based on a
participatory map update system. An idea of Ehud Shabtai, an Israeli
researcher who hacked GPS systems to improve the mapping of his country
and who decided to create an open source application, capable of
combining all the information sent by motorists (accidents, roadworks,
traffic jams, presence of radar, etc.) and of updating the map in real
time. In about fifteen years, Waze has made the competition look
old-fashioned. In 2013, it was bought by Google for \$966 million
(nearly €905 million) and now has nearly 140 million users worldwide,
including 17 million in France. Recognized as very practical tools for
finding your way easily, GPS applications are not without their perverse
effects. This is what research conducted by the Institute of
Transportation Studies at the University of California at Berkeley,
published in 2018, reveals. Once the threshold of 20% of motorists using
GPS applications to take alternative routes is exceeded, the study shows
that congestion forms at the access ramps, ultimately creating more
traffic difficulties on the highway. Worse: a continuous and massive
flow of traffic flows onto secondary roads, which do not have sufficient
infrastructure to cope with it. Faced with what American researchers
call the \"Waze effect\", many elected officials and residents of small
towns all over the world are complaining about being invaded by a horde
of motorists and heavy goods vehicles. The phenomenon particularly
affects towns located near major traffic routes. In France, voices have
been raised in Cornebarrieu (Haute-Garonne), Blagnac (Haute-Garonne),
Aulnay-sous-Bois (Seine-Saint-Denis), Compiègne (Oise), Hettange-Grande
(Moselle), and Lieusaint (Seine-et-Marne). Crossed in its heart by the
D925 departmental road, the small village of Camphin-en-Carembault, in
the North, has gradually transformed into a transit zone for motorists
wanting to escape the traffic jams on the A1, the motorway linking Lille
to Paris, located a few kilometres away. \"We counted up to 14,000
vehicles per day on this road,\" says Matthieu Lestoquoy, mayor of this
village of 1,800 inhabitants. \"For local residents, such traffic
generates its share of inconveniences: traffic jams, noise pollution,
pollution, but also safety problems. Residents living along this road
were no longer able to leave their homes by car, pedestrian crossings
were no longer respected, and three children were even hit by
vehicles,\" says the mayor. Matthieu Lestoquoy then tried to alert Waze,
without success. \"What do they care about a small town like ours? On
our scale, we can\'t fight it.\" Contacted to find out to what extent it
could take action, the company replied that \"the application directs
its users using only public road infrastructure, based on local driving
laws and legal road signs in the region. Local authorities are the only
ones authorized to make certain changes, which will be relevant for all
drivers using this road.\" In fact, some cities have not hesitated to
take radical decisions to escape the law of algorithms. In the United
States, the mayor of Leonia, New Jersey, decided in December 2017 to
close about sixty streets to non-residents from 6 a.m. to 10 a.m. and
from 4 p.m. to 9 p.m., to prevent workers from traveling to New York via
his city. Motorists who choose to ignore this regulation are now liable
to a \$200 fine. Sometimes, it is the local residents themselves who use
perfidy to thwart the recommendations of the apps. In Berlin, the artist
Simon Weckert tried an experiment. In a small cart, he carried 99
smartphones, all activated in geolocation mode. As a result, in every
street he walks on, the route turns from green to red on GPS apps, which
think it\'s a traffic jam, thus redirecting drivers to another route.
Enough to catch the apps at their own game and send traffic elsewhere?
Not so simple, according to the response provided by Waze: \"The routing
process takes into account several data points \[without saying how
many\], so that even if people submit false declarations, it will not
have a lasting effect on the routing.\" In the North, Simon Weckert\'s
attempt inspired Matthieu Lestoquoy. To put a spoke in the wheels of GPS
users, the municipality of Camphin-en-Carembault last year put in place
two stop signs, a traffic light and the establishment of a \"30 zone\"
between two raised platforms installed at the entrance and exit of the
town. For several years, other communities have launched similar
initiatives. In Lieusaint, in the Paris region, in 2019 the mayor
installed traffic lights in the city center, made some streets one-way
and lowered the speed limit to 30 kilometers per hour to slow down
motorists. Since 2017, this city of 12,000 inhabitants has been
transformed into a relief route for around ten thousand drivers wanting
to avoid the traffic jams of the Francilienne. \"To save a maximum of
six minutes, motorists turn the city upside down,\" fumes Michel Bisson,
mayor of Lieusaint, who contacted Waze to try to find a solution. \"We
don\'t know if our requests have been taken into account. All we know is
that Waze agreed to remove the routes near schools, the residents were
afraid for the safety of their children. In any case, thanks to our
measures, traffic has slightly improved, but to say that we are out of
the woods is another story.\" In Camphin-en-Carembault, the development
changes also seem to have produced encouraging results. Matthieu
Lestoquoy has observed a drop of 2,000 cars per day. \"The effects are
visible on the app,\" the elected official shows. \"You can see an
orange and red marker on this road in our town, thanks to the slowdowns.
This does not encourage motorists to risk it. Even if it is still far
from perfect, traffic is becoming more reasonable again.\" Yony Bouchard
has also seen the difference. Located in a charming subdivision, his
house adjoins the departmental road. For ten years, this resident of
Camphin-en-Carembault had been living in \"hell\", to the point of
thinking about moving. \"With the nuisances, it was impossible to eat in
the garden. And we couldn\'t even cross the road to take our children to
school. Once, I even lost my cool by kicking a car in the bumper to
force it to stop. Things have improved. Cars drive more slowly, it\'s
become less noisy, we live more peacefully.\" For Jean Haentjens, a
consultant in foresight and urban strategies, author of How the digital
giants want to govern our cities (Rue de l\'Echiquier, 2018), a
confrontation between real space and virtual space has inexorably set
in. \"It illustrates the desire of local authorities to maintain control
of their public space in the face of firms whose commercial logic is
based on the city \"as a service\", where the general interest does not
count. Waze\'s goal is only to take you from point A to point B, despite
the logic of the political city, in principle based on living well
together. Especially since these digital giants are riding on the
intimate conviction of offering a useful solution that public
authorities are incapable of providing to the population.\" However, it
happens that communities also find it to their advantage to partner with
these data masters. To become smart cities anchored in the digital age,
some have formed a partnership with Waze. This is the case of the
European Metropolis of Lille (MEL). Since 2016, this agglomeration of 90
municipalities has been sending information concerning the circulation
of citizens, road works, and demonstrations that could block the journey
of users of the application. For its part, Waze gives access to its data
to partner cities. \"The results are rather positive,\" assures Florent
Berault, head of the metropolitan public data service (SPMD) team at the
MEL. In terms of security, for example, these data exchanges allow Waze
to integrate into its routes the streets on which a city\'s schools are
located and to limit the passage there. This cross-referencing of
information is now a resource that we rely on for monitoring, analyzing,
and diagnosing urban planning.\" Waze, a tool that could ultimately
prove to be at the service of the common good? Possible. Jean Haentjens
nevertheless has some reservations. A law of October 7, 2016 requires
local authorities with more than 3,500 inhabitants and more than 50
agents to publish their data in open data. In other words, traffic data
can be consulted free of charge by all individuals. \"As Waze can no
longer claim exclusivity of this data in cities affected by the
legislation, in particular to resell it to private actors, its
collaboration with the public service presents a marketing advantage.
This gives it a veneer of philanthropy, explains the researcher. On the
other hand, the app can quite easily suck the data out of small cities
excluded from the system, which do not necessarily have the human and
financial resources to collect and protect this information.\" And these
cities risk suffering from the \"Waze effect\" for a long time to come.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1745

It\'s a cold shower on the stock market for Meta. After seeing its share
price triple in 2023, then increase by 40% since the beginning of the
year, the social media giant\'s star has faded on Wall Street. While
Meta had just presented the accounts for its first fiscal quarter, its
share price fell by 16% on Wednesday on the stock market. However, Mark
Zuckerberg\'s group revealed results that exceeded analysts\'
expectations. Its turnover grew by 27%, to \$36.4 billion in the first
quarter, its strongest growth since 2021. Its profits more than doubled
over the same period, to reach \$12.37 billion, boosted in particular by
a 16% drop in marketing spending. And it claims 3.24 billion daily
active users on Facebook, Instagram, WhatsApp and Threads, which allows
it to retain its crown as the world\'s number 1 social network. It was
its forecasts for the second quarter that disappointed investors. It is
targeting sales of between \$36.5 billion and \$39 billion (around 18%
growth), below the \$38.3 billion expected by analysts. Above all, Meta
plans to increase its investments this year to fuel its resources in
artificial intelligence, mainly in infrastructure, data centers and R&D.
Meta should invest \$35 billion to \$40 billion this year, more than the
\$30 billion to \$37 billion initially planned, and significantly more
than the \$28 billion spent last year. Next year, this increase should
be even more significant, \"as we invest aggressively to support our
ambitious R&D efforts in AI,\" said Susan Li, Meta\'s CFO. \"I believe
we have gained in optimism and ambition on AI,\" added Mark Zuckerberg.
Staying in the race At the same time, Meta also intends to continue
investing in the metaverse, the leader\'s big bet, where its losses have
widened (\$3.85 billion in the first quarter for \$440 million in
sales). Since the end of 2020, its Reality Labs division - which notably
includes its Quest mixed reality headset and its Ray-Ban connected
glasses (designed with EssilorLuxottica) - has accumulated more than
\$45 billion in losses. Enough to cause concern in the markets. Because
these investments in AI represent a long-term bet and are not yet
generating money. \"Once our new AI-based services reach critical size,
we will know how to monetize them effectively,\" assures the CEO of
Meta, who recalls having already experienced this level of
\"volatility\" in its stock price when developing new activities. Having
started late, the group is trying to stay in the frenzied race for AI
that the tech giants are engaged in with tens of billions of dollars of
investment. Microsoft, which has just presented Phi-3 Mini, the first in
a new series of small models, adapted to simple tasks that can be done
on a smartphone for example, has announced nearly 10 billion dollars of
investments in AI abroad in recent months. The craze for generative AI
generated over the past two years and the launch of ChatGPT (OpenAI), is
forcing Meta to redouble its efforts. \"We are no longer content to
train good AI models to build new products for social networks and
online commerce,\" declared the CEO of Meta. \"We have reached a point
where we are showing that we can build cutting-edge models and become
the number one AI company in the world.\" The match promises to be
tight. Last December, the group launched its virtual assistant, Meta AI,
in English-speaking countries, with around twenty features. The tool can
answer users\' questions, but also generate text and images, including
within a conversation. Despite its late launch, Meta intends to make it
\"the best and most used AI assistant in the world\". In open source It
is betting in particular on the performance of the latest version of its
language model, Llama 3. \"Meta AI will be available to all WhatsApp,
Messenger, Facebook or Instagram users when they do a search, chat with
their friends or create photos or videos, Chris Cox, product director of
the American giant, recently explained to Le Figaro. People are now
ready to interact with an AI.\" A technology that Meta has chosen to
develop in open source, that is to say accessible to all for free,
unlike most of its rivals. \"The entire developer community can thus
massively use its language models and contribute to improving them while
allowing Meta to take market share,\" explains Aimé Lachapelle, managing
partner of the Emerton Data firm. Meta is also banking on the synergies
of Meta AI with its products dedicated to the metaverse. \"Smart glasses
are ideal for the AI assistant, because it allows it to see what you see
and hear what you hear,\" added Mark Zuckerberg. So the assistant has
all the context to help you.\" Meta intends to defend its place in this
new AI revolution. KL

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1746

Meta intends to play a leading role in artificial intelligence (AI). A
little less visible in recent months than the creator of ChatGPT,
OpenAI, and its partner Microsoft, or than Google and its competing
conversational robot Gemini, the parent company of Facebook, Instagram
and WhatsApp is displaying its ambitions: \"We want to make Meta AI the
leader in AI assistants,\" explains Nick Clegg, the group\'s president
in charge of public affairs. Meta announced, this Thursday, April 18, a
new version of its conversational robot, accessible on its social
networks or its messaging services (including Messenger) and, now, on
its Ray-Ban connected glasses and via a website, Meta.ai. Available in
the United States since September 2023, Meta AI is being extended to
twelve other English-speaking countries. The assistant will use the
group\'s new generation of language processing models, Llama 3, also
unveiled on Thursday, April 18. "We believe Meta AI is the smartest AI
assistant that can be used for free," Meta founder and CEO Mark
Zuckerberg said in a video message. "Meta AI will be more visible across
our platforms. You can ask it a question by pressing a button in the
search bar on Instagram, WhatsApp or Facebook, or by typing \@metaai in
a multi-person conversation with friends or colleagues," Clegg said. The
assistant will be able to search on Google or Bing if needed. Meta AI
will also be available in Facebook's news feed. And in the future in
Meta Quest virtual reality headsets. According to Meta, its robot can
rephrase a work email, ask for restaurant suggestions, an explanation of
genetics, furniture ideas for a new apartment... Meta AI can generate
images (by typing "/imagine" in a conversation) and, starting this
Thursday, April 18, show the result live as the user types the query, or
animate a still image. The assistant is now available in English in
Australia, Canada, New Zealand, South Africa, Nigeria, Pakistan,
Singapore, Ghana, Jamaica, Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe -- and is being
tested in India. More countries and languages will be added "in the
coming months," Clegg says. In an attempt to gain a foothold in the
competition, Meta plans to leverage the power of its existing platforms.
And to use the weapon of free. "Our philosophy is to create technologies
that are useful to the greatest number of people and then think about
how to monetize them," Clegg theorizes. "The fact that we have so many
users (4 billion) and that we offer an easy-to-use assistant, integrated
into the services that people are already used to, differentiates us
from our competitors." Long-standing investment OpenAI offers ChatGPT
for free, but to benefit from the most powerful version and avoid
waiting times in case of high demand, you have to pay: \$20 (18.75
euros) per month. The company claims 100 million users per week. Its
partner, Microsoft, has integrated its Copilot assistant into its Bing
search engine for free, but using it in its Office suite costs \$30 per
month. You have to pay \$20 per month to access the Gemini (formerly
Bard) service in Google\'s competing suite, Workspace. The digital giant
offers its assistant as a free standalone service, but has not yet
integrated it into its search engine and is reportedly considering
introducing a subscription. Mr. Zuckerberg has long invested in AI: in
2013, before the launch of OpenAI, in 2015, he created the Facebook
Artificial Intelligence Research center -- with an office in Paris since
2015. He hired pioneer Yann LeCun. The company uses AI to prioritize and
moderate content on its social networks. In the recent phase, Meta has
sought to distinguish itself by highlighting its open source strategy,
while Google or OpenAI are criticized for no longer publishing their AI
models, as they did a few years ago: Llama models are freely accessible
and can be modified by developers and companies (except very large
groups). \"Llama 3 is the best open source AI model,\" assures Mr.
Clegg, announcing, this Thursday, its versions with 8 billion and 70
billion parameters and, for \"the coming months\", the one with 405
billion. Financed by targeted advertising on its social networks, Meta
could hinder the activity of those who, like OpenAI or Google, market
their models. It also competes with start-ups like the French Mistral
AI, which mixes paid and open source models. However, Meta\'s offensive
raises questions. Will its assistant be popular with Internet users? Its
28 personalized chatbots, inspired by personalities and launched in
September 2023, at the same time as the general version of Meta AI,
seemed like a gimmick. And Meta does not provide any usage figures for
these robots. The question of the economic model will also arise,
because operating an assistant costs a few fractions of a cent for each
request and involves billions of dollars of investment in computing. The
integration of AI assistants into the services of the dominant digital
players could also give rise to calls for regulation: some are demanding
that competition be respected, by allowing the user to use the robot of
their choice on their social network, search engine, etc. They are
calling for the integration of AI assistants into the European Digital
Markets Act regulation. Finally, massively deploying chatbots raises
questions about reliability and content moderation for social networks
and messaging services, already accused of being both too lax and
\"censoring\" too much. Assistants make factual errors and
"hallucinate": a journalist noted on X that Meta AI had responded to
parents of disabled children that they themselves had a child in this
situation... "No one in the industry claims that these systems don't
sometimes hallucinate. The only solution is to always clearly indicate
to the user that they are talking to an AI and to offer mechanisms for
reporting problematic content," replies Mr. Clegg. Meta committed in
early April to labeling any content created with an AI on its services,
but in the absence of an industry standard, this currently depends on
the wishes of the users who create the content.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1747

We must imagine that one day artificial intelligence will reach the
level of human intelligence, or even amplify it. Our AIs will understand
how the world works, they will know our preferences and interests. They
will be able to answer all our questions. They will not replace us,
because we will set rules from their design. It will be a new
Renaissance.\" This vision, shared this Wednesday by Yann LeCun,
director of fundamental research in AI at Meta, will not be realized, by
his admission, for many years. But it is already infusing the social
media giant, which has made AI its number one priority for 2024. \"It
has a key place in all the products and services that we create,\" Chris
Cox, director of products at Meta, explained to Le Figaro, who was in
Paris for a press conference dedicated to this technology. In our
opinion, AI must make our users\' lives easier by removing all the
little obstacles in their daily lives.\" To achieve this, the group has
reorganized itself. Last January, it integrated its fundamental AI
research laboratories (Fair) into its product division, which includes
the Facebook, Instagram, WhatsApp and Ray-Ban Meta smart glasses
applications. \"We want to put this technology in people\'s hands,\" he
continues. \"This will also encourage our researchers to work on topics
that can easily be transformed into products.\" It is also a way for the
world\'s number one social network to position itself as a champion in
terms of innovation, one of the obsessions of its founder, Mark
Zuckerberg. The ChatGPT revolution has passed through, forcing Meta to
accelerate. \"In the near future, all our interactions with the digital
world will go through virtual assistants,\" predicts Yann LeCun. The
group is therefore banking on its Meta AI assistant. \"It will be
available to all WhatsApp, Messenger, Facebook or Instagram users when
they do a search, chat with their friends or create photos or videos,\"
explains Chris Cox. People are now ready to interact with AI." Meta AI
has been available to the general public in the United States since last
December with around twenty features. The tool can generate text and
images, including within a conversation. "Meta AI is intended to become
the world number one virtual assistant," insists Joëlle Pineau, vice
president of AI research. Ray-Ban smart glasses, designed in partnership
with EssilorLuxottica, are also equipped with Meta AI, which works with
voice commands. An update, planned for this month in the United States,
"will allow the glasses to understand what is in front of you," explains
Chris Cox. This can be particularly useful if, for example, you are
visiting a foreign country and you need to find your way." This
interpretation of the real world "represents an enormous technical
challenge." The next version of Meta's language model, Llama 3, is at
the heart of this innovation. Mark Zuckerberg\'s priority Meta is also
banking on AI to improve its products and services for businesses.
WhatsApp is used by 100 million merchants around the world to manage
their relationships with customers. \"We\'re going to integrate tools to
allow them to automate these exchanges, in their own language,\" says
Chris Cox. Image generation tools will be able to help small businesses
easily design their advertising campaigns on Facebook or Instagram. The
Menlo Park firm is not starting from scratch. Artificial intelligence
has been feeding its products for more than ten years. It is behind
content recommendations, as well as in moderation tools and detection of
problematic content. Starting next month, Meta will label images
generated by AI on Instagram and Facebook. \"This will strengthen user
confidence,\" comments Chris Cox. Because if these images represent a
tiny part of content today, their volume will obviously increase in the
coming years. With 2 billion people around the world going to the polls
this year, Meta is looking to "increase transparency" to combat
misinformation. Elections already held in Indonesia, Bangladesh, Taiwan
and Pakistan provide early signs of this. "We've seen very little
AI-generated content that's designed to discourage voters from voting or
that's spreading fake news," says Cox. "But it's obviously something
we're paying a lot of attention to." Meta's advances in artificial
intelligence are overseen by CEO Mark Zuckerberg, who has made it a
priority. "Mark is an engineer first and foremost. He's very invested in
this subject and wants to know everything about our work and how it
translates into products. We work closely together," notes Cox. The
stakes are high. Generative AI has launched an arms race between tech
titans, who have no intention of being overtaken by their rivals. "Mark
is willing to bet big when he believes in a technology of the future."
Meta will invest between 30 billion and 37 billion dollars this year,
which illustrates its determination," continues the product director.
This sum will feed two strategic battlefields: gray matter and
infrastructure. "To train your advanced AI models, you need data centers
with processors (GPUs) in number to have the best computing power,"
recalls Chris Cox. Meta plans to deploy 600,000 GPUs this year, half of
which will come from the leader Nvidia. But the group is also working on
its own processor, called Artemis. The war for brains is also in full
swing. Google, OpenAI and Microsoft have their own fundamental research
laboratories, and, like the co-founders of Mistral AI, some talents are
leaving to found their own company. Meta intends to distinguish itself
by its open source approach, "a position that others do not necessarily
follow and which requires courage," continues the director. Knowing that
their work will be public and shared with the scientific community "is a
strong element in attracting talent." According to The Information, Mark
Zuckerberg himself would contact researchers at Google DeepMind to
convince them to move to Meta. The entrepreneur had warned during the
publication of his last financial results: \"If we play, it is to win.\"
KL ET CW

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1748

New York - correspondent - The portrait could classically begin with
business: at 56, Reid Hoffman is part of the \"PayPal mafia\", the
nickname given to these young prodigies of Silicon Valley, who founded
the payment firm with Elon Musk and Peter Thiel and made the success of
American tech in the 2000s. Co-founder of LinkedIn in 2002, investor in
the early days of Facebook and Airbnb, venture capitalist at Greylock,
former member of the board of directors of the artificial intelligence
(AI) company OpenAI, Reid Hoffman is at the head of a fortune estimated
by Forbes magazine at 2.5 billion dollars (around 2.3 billion euros). We
could continue with politics: unlike his libertarian colleagues Messrs.
Musk and Thiel, who have moved to the far right, Reid Hoffman is a
Democrat, who is doing everything to oppose a second term for Donald
Trump: he contributed -- in vain -- to the campaign of his primary
opponent Nikki Haley and financed -- successfully -- the defamation
lawsuit filed by former Elle magazine journalist E. Jean Carroll, who
accuses Donald Trump of raping her. But we chose to start the
conversation with philosophy, during an hour-long meeting in a chic
hotel in the heart of Manhattan, New York. In these times of take-off of
artificial intelligence, Mr. Hoffman believes that technology shapes
generations and he is one of those who want to accelerate. \"When we
invented the steam engine, we created the working class and the middle
class. We don\'t want to go back to a peasant society. The generation
that is growing up is doing it with artificial intelligence. The older
ones worry, oh my God, it's new, it's foreign. The younger ones think
it's cool, say, 'Let's see what I can do with it.'" A Silicon Valley
atypical In a recent speech at the University of Bologna (Italy), the
oldest in Europe, Reid Hoffman compared the current times to the
Renaissance, evoking a "deeply humanist approach to technology": "We
shape our technology, which in turn shapes us, and we want to do it in a
way that makes us more human." Of course, fears are raised. "Hollywood
always portrays man versus machine, and the machine is always the bad
guy," whether it's James Cameron's Terminator (1984), starring Arnold
Schwarzenegger, or HAL 9000, the IBM computer in Stanley Kubrick's 2001:
A Space Odyssey (1968). In the past, innovation was disruptive, like
Galileo's telescope or the automobile, which frightened so much that
"people waved orange flags as it passed by." Before the virtues of these
advances were exploited. Reid Hoffman, who in 2023 had fun writing a
book with artificial intelligence -- Impromptu: Amplifying Our Humanity
Through AI (Dallepedia LLC) -- describes himself as a "mystical
atheist," because he recognizes many mysteries: "Atheists say the world
is just Newtonian mechanics. Clearly, the world is more interesting than
that. For example, we don't understand consciousness." This Californian
has followed an eclectic path that makes him an atypical character in
Silicon Valley. He recounts a stay in a progressive boarding school in
Vermont, a rural state in the Northeast: "I went to Putney School
because they try to train balanced human beings. I did blacksmithing,
woodworking, it\'s part of me.\" Then he studied at the prestigious
Stanford University in California, notably in neuroscience. \"I deduced
that they didn\'t really know what intelligent language was, I thought
that philosophy might have an answer. So I went to study at Oxford
\[United Kingdom\] and I concluded that philosophers didn\'t know what
intelligent language was either. And that perhaps the best way to
contribute was to create software.\" \"Nobody likes referees\" In the
adventure of artificial intelligence, he invites Europe to get involved,
in particular to inject its cultural point of view. \"The world and
Europe would be better off if Europe also innovated.\" America
innovates, the Old Continent regulates, says the adage in the United
States. Mr. Hoffman responds with a cruel joke: \"It\'s a bit like
there\'s a World Cup soccer match between China and the United States
with Europe trying to be the referee. That poses two problems: first,
Europe can\'t win, and second, no one particularly likes referees.\"
Reid Hoffman praises French projects, in particular the start-up Mistral
AI, which has just signed a partnership with Microsoft. \"In my American
eyes, they are very French.\" For him, it is normal that these young
prodigies have learned their trade at American tech giants. \"It would
not have been possible to just graduate from a university.\" On the
German side? \"\[He has\] not seen on \[his\] radars\" a significant
effort in artificial intelligence. The subject, from an American point
of view, remains the competition with China. \"They say that China
thinks in centuries. That\'s not the case in tech: they think in weeks.
It's the only place in the world where I find Silicon Valley is slow."
However, China has a kind of paradoxical flaw, a low capacity for
perseverance: "They pivot very quickly, but they don't commit to
multi-year projects." For the moment, according to him, despite their
lead in data, "the Chinese are two years behind" the Americans in their
race for AI. This delay is also explained by the difficulties of
accessing microprocessors, due to multiple American embargoes, while
Washington massively subsidizes this industry. "The Biden administration
wants to be sure that the United States maintains its lead in this key
area," explains Mr. Hoffman, who emphasizes the impact of artificial
intelligence on the entire American economic fabric: "AI is our only
hope for regaining our manufacturing industry that created the middle
class. » On the other hand, he says he is reluctant about open source
software, open to all, in artificial intelligence. \"I was on the board
of Mozilla \[which develops free software\] for eleven years \[from 2005
to 2016\], so I am very positive on many subjects. But when you open
high-capacity models, you don\'t just give them to journalists, to
academic bodies, which is good. You also give them to rogue states, to
terrorists, to people who want to attack the information ecosystem or
democracy. We have vulnerabilities, so I am cautious.\" Severe on
Biden\'s attitude Given the immense computing capacities required, AI
seems for the moment to benefit the tech giants (Nvidia, Microsoft,
Meta, Google, Amazon, Apple, Tesla) renamed the \"magnificent seven\".
\"I invest a lot in start-ups,\" says Mr. Hoffman. These are grafted
onto the giants, which are expected to multiply. \"If the seven become
three, then yes I have a problem. But if the seven become fifteen,
that\'s progress.\" And to vilify the antitrust policy of the Biden
administration led by the chair of the Federal Trade Commission, Lina
Khan, who is multiplying the lawsuits against the West Coast technology
giants: \"I speak out largely against this antitrust policy, because it
pursues the collapse and not the expansion,\" he accuses, denouncing \"a
use that may not be illegal, but immoral of a position of authority to
hinder as much as possible the big tech companies.\" Similarly, he is
harsh on the attitude of Joe Biden, who opened hostilities against Elon
Musk by not inviting him to a summit on electric cars at the White House
in the summer of 2021 on the pretext that his factories were
non-unionized. \"Elon tends to be a fighter. And when the left started
attacking him, he fought back like Robert De Niro in Taxi Driver
\[1976\]. But holding a summit on electric cars at the White House
without inviting him is laughable, grotesque! \", he laments. And to
point out that the effect is also disastrous with the tech community,
which notes that the White House is in denial of reality to please the
unions. As the quarters go by, Mr. Musk drifts, convinced that the
challenge is to create an anti-woke artificial intelligence.
\"Personally, what obsesses me is to have, thanks to artificial
intelligence, a medical system accessible to everyone on their
smartphone.\" Mr. Hoffman also criticizes the libertarian drift of
Messrs. Musk and Thiel, who seem to believe that we can do without a
State. \"Have you ever tried to be an entrepreneur in Afghanistan? It\'s
difficult, isn\'t it? That's where I break ranks with my PayPal buddies
because I think, yes, government matters." In November's presidential
election, Hoffman is pulling out all the stops to prevent a second Trump
term. "I'm not inherently Democrat versus Republican. I've funded a
whole series of Republican candidates, the most recent being Nikki
Haley," the former South Carolina governor who ran against Trump for the
Republican nomination. She didn't succeed. So clearly, he'll be voting
for Joe Biden, whose national and international record he says is
underestimated. "Being old doesn't mean you're nonfunctional," he says,
and Joe Biden, for him, is not "nonfunctional": "Absolutely not. In
December \[2023\], I spent hours talking to him about things he didn't
know about, like artificial intelligence. Why did I need to have lunch
with him? I needed to know that."

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1749

There is no longer a discourse on innovation, digital technology and
artificial intelligence (AI) that does not make \"humans\" the
cornerstone of its raison d\'être. The \"human-centric\" vision makes
technology a tool at its service. Including the report \"AI: our
ambition for France\" submitted to the President of the Republic on
March 13 by the Artificial Intelligence Commission, one chapter of which
is entitled \"Humanism: let\'s put AI at our service\". This is
commendable, incontestable, irrefutable. But it is both a reductive
vision of AI and a very specific acceptance of the humanist movement.
First, a digital object or service is not - and has never been - a
simple tool. The Internet, social networks and AI are sociotechnical and
political devices designed by humans. However, through calculations
(intentional, mathematical, ethical, moral, financial, etc.), digital
technology makes them invisible. It is therefore necessary to \"open the
hood\" of calculations so that the human, who is the starting point of
any digital device, remains the end point. Then, the humanism that
underlies progress through AI, as described in the commission\'s report,
is more akin to an existentialist humanism, focused on the individual,
freedom of choice and personal responsibility, than to a humanism as it
can be accepted in everyday language, synonymous with benevolence,
altruism, and a concern for the common good, in a global, and not local,
perspective. In this respect, the humanism mentioned stops at the
borders of the nation, and at the perimeter of the individual. But to
claim to have a concern for humans is to have to fulfill a
responsibility towards them. Designers of AI systems must be made aware
of the social, cognitive, ethical and even environmental consequences
that their technical choices generate. When a building collapses, the
architect\'s responsibility is studied. When an algorithm promotes
disinformation or amplifies multiple psychosocial risks, what about the
responsibility of its architect(s)? To do this, the fundamentals of
science and technology, anthropology and sociology must be taught more
widely than they are in technical curricula. Sharing such a common
culture would also make it possible to move away from the technocratic
dreams and hasty amalgams that make every wave of new uses a new
revolution. However, this accountability cannot be achieved without
increased transparency of AI systems, which must involve close
collaboration between international regulations and governments, in
order to establish clear and accessible standards around the development
and use of AI. The figure of the human is very practical. It reifies a
totemic, hegemonic, spiritual and universalist figure in which everyone
enjoys projecting the incarnation that suits them. But its call for a
meeting is silent on the diversity of humans who populate our shared
world. Rebound effect In this respect, the AI commission mystifies its
subject of study, forgetting to look closely at the data production
chain. Those we call click workers play a crucial role in the
development of generative AI, acting as the invisible workers who feed
and refine these systems. By performing repetitive tasks, such as data
tagging, image classification and text correction, they help to train
and improve the accuracy of AI algorithms. Their work, often underpaid
and precarious, is essential to create vast and varied databases,
allowing AIs to generate credible and relevant content. As generative AI
becomes more integrated into our daily lives, it is no longer
appropriate to silence these ethical considerations on the working
conditions and fair compensation of these workers. Second, generative AI
pollutes massively. Of course, the calculation methods are complex,
debatable, perfectible and different depending on the stages of the life
cycle. But the trends are reported. Therefore, by presenting AI as an
opportunity for the planet, although some perspectives may be positive
and that already trained open source models or transfer learning can
considerably reduce the energy impact of AI, the rapporteurs of the
commission are obscuring the reality of the explosion in the consumption
of raw materials and energy required throughout the life cycle of a
digital device. In addition, not a word is said about the rebound
effect, or Jevons paradox, which is well known in the case of digital
technology: even if consumption per unit decreases, overall consumption
increases due to its massification. Believing that technology is an
answer to technology on an environmental level is to fall into what the
commission itself denounces in the first pages of its report:
\"techno-messianism\"! The AI Commission has produced an ambitious,
necessary and useful economic and strategic vision. But, in the land of
universalism, another time must undoubtedly come, that of a more global
vision, which brings together and is respectful of the depth and
complexity of this socio-technical evolution that is AI.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1750

The strongman of its early days had become its Achilles heel. Emad
Mostaque, co-founder and CEO of UK-based Stability AI, has left the
company, resigning as CEO and from the board. "The concentration of
power in AI is bad for all of us. I have decided to resign to address
this problem at StabilityAI and elsewhere." \"I\'ll share more soon,\"
he tweeted Friday, March 23 on X. Behind the rather sudden departure of
this character, often described as atypical, extravagant, whimsical and
even crazy, lies a lost arm wrestling match against the investment fund
Coatue, which became its main shareholder since a fundraising of \$100
million in October 2022. At that time, Stability AI was one of the stars
of generative AI thanks to its very efficient image generation model
Stable Diffusion, which supported competition from Dall-E (Open AI) or
Midjourney. After a meteoric start to this fundraising that transformed
it into a unicorn, the company experienced several upheavals. In the
spring of 2023, Stability AI failed to raise the \$400 million it needed
to finance its growth. As good and popular as they were, its open source
models did not generate enough revenue to allow it to be profitable.
However, in this industry, which is also very competitive, the computing
power for training and operating models is very expensive. Its cash flow
is melting like snow in the sun, the company is under great pressure, it
is taking out loans. In November 2023, Bloomberg even mentioned the
option of a sale. Talents are leaving the ship For the Coatue fund, this
inability to raise new funds under the desired conditions is to be
blamed on Emad Mostaque, his mistakes, and even his distortions of
reality, brought to light by media investigations. First, Stability AI
does not own the intellectual property on the AI model powering Stable
Diffusion, which was actually designed by researchers at the University
of Munich. Second, the model was trained with images to which it did not
have the rights, which earned it a lawsuit with the Getty photo agency
and with another collective of artists. Emad Mostaque is suspected of
having been misleading about certain financial and commercial data of
the company. The Coatue fund had been calling for his head for several
months. It finally got it. While waiting to find a new CEO, the interim
is being handled by a duo, the \"chief operating officer\" Shan Shan
Wong and the technical director Christian Laforte, who will be
responsible for bringing back a little serenity and perspective. Several
key talents have also left the ship in recent months, including the
research director. In February, the start-up gave itself some breathing
room by selling its video editing platform ClipDrop, purchased in 2023.
It will take more than that to ensure its survival. IV

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1751

For the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO),
it is enemy number one. \"The desert locust is the most destructive
migratory pest in the world. They are voracious eaters that consume
their own weight per day. A cloud of 1 square kilometer can contain up
to 80 million adult locusts that consume in one day the same amount of
food as 35,000 people,\" explains the institution whose goal is to
eradicate hunger in the world. However, global warming favors the
large-scale reproduction of this insect capable of traveling up to 1,000
kilometers per week. Once limited to East Africa, it has begun to spread
throughout the African continent and beyond, in Southwest Asia and the
Middle East. \"They live in arid or semi-arid areas where rainfall is
less than 200 millimeters per year. Their current habitat area is
approximately 16 million square kilometers, encompassing around thirty
countries,\" explains the FAO. To help the countries concerned combat
this particularly harmful species, the FAO produces monthly bulletins
detailing the location and extent of past or current invasions. However,
prevention is better than cure. Especially given the exponential growth
of those also called tiger locusts: each new generation can have up to
20 times more individuals than the previous one, or 8,000 times more
locusts in nine months. The challenge is therefore to destroy the eggs
before they hatch (in two weeks) or the larvae before they become flying
locusts (in four months). This is what motivated FAO to share in 2017
its database on locusts, initiated in 1975, with the artificial
intelligence specialist InstaDeep, \"We imagine applications of AI that
benefit everyone. Applications in the environmental field are very
limited, while the challenges are immense, especially in Africa,
disproportionately impacted by climate change. This is why we proposed
to FAO, with our partner Google, to use their data on locusts to
establish a method for predicting clouds. Impressed by the first results
of our research, published at the end of 2021, they became our
partners\", recalls Karim Beguir, CEO of the company co-founded ten
years ago with Zohra Selim. Two years of research later, the two AI
specialists have developed a model capable of geolocating the places
where females lay eggs. \"For a deep learning program to be effective,
it is necessary to combine data on the presence and absence of insects.
We mixed historical data from the FAO with recent environmental and
climate data, as well as images from NASA and European Space Agency
satellites. This gives us an accuracy of 30 square meters,\" explains
the entrepreneur. Predicting more than 8 out of 10 clouds \"Our
simulations show that we can correctly predict more than 8 out of 10
locust clouds. Since the data from our method is updated every 5 days
and covers the entire African continent for the first time, it will now
be possible to intervene in time,\" emphasizes the manager. He
continues: \"It is important that Africans take ownership of key AI
technology and use it to solve the problems we face on the continent.
\"It is our teams located in Nigeria and Rwanda as well as those in
Ghana from Google AI who created this model that we have decided to
share in open source\", announces Karim Beguir. Next step: the InstaDeep
teams are starting to deploy the method in the field with the FAO teams,
who in turn support governments. The fight against invasive species,
which are set to multiply as the earth warms, is now being waged in the
real and virtual worlds.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1752

Paris confirms its status as a talent magnet in artificial intelligence.
The start-up Adaptive ML, founded just over five months ago and
specializing in generative AI, has raised nearly \$20 million from a
group of investors including Californian Index Ventures and Iconiq
Capital. Having trained in start-ups already in the ecosystem, such as
Hugging Face or LightOn, the three co-founders decided to set up their
company in October 2023. Adaptive\'s solution allows companies to
integrate generative AI into their business applications. \"Large
language models are too generic and expensive. We provide companies with
a technological layer to adapt them to end use cases,\" says Julien
Launay, CEO of the young company. Based on major open source models such
as Mistral, LLaMa or Falcon, developed by LightOn, Adaptive\'s
technology allows generative AI to learn from interactions with each
user on company platforms, in order to offer more relevant responses.
\"Our technology makes it possible to optimize the responses provided by
AI to customers by analyzing previous interactions. This reduces
costs,\" insists the start-up\'s manager. This technology, known as
\"reinforcement learning,\" can, according to the co-founder, be very
useful in the customer support or call center sector, for example. R&D
center in Paris In a sector where competition is becoming fiercer,
Adaptive ML has chosen to quickly focus on designing a marketable
product. \"Our solution is developed so that the customer does not need
to hire additional people.\" Its \$20 million fundraising will allow it
to continue research on its technology, acquire computing power and
double its current team to add around ten people. Adaptive also plans to
open an R&D center in Paris. However, its headquarters will be located
in New York. \"We are going to open an office there, which will be a
100% commercial structure. The United States remains an essential market
at the moment,\" explains Julien Launay. Like the French Mistral, which
is multiplying agreements to distribute its language models - the most
notable being with Microsoft - does Adaptive plan to promote its
technology through partnerships? \"This type of partnership sometimes
exonerates start-ups on the commercial side. We want to keep control,\"
recalls Julien Launay, acknowledging that distribution via companies
like Salesforce, for example, can make sense. This round of funding, led
by Index Ventures, also brought together the funds Iconiq Capital,
Motier Ventures, the Franco-German Iris Capital, and HuggingFund by
Factorial. It reflects the current frenzy among financiers for
artificial intelligence. According to the American specialist media The
Information, the company\'s valuation has already reached 100 million
dollars. LM

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1753

In content produced by artificial intelligence (AI), women are more
frequently assigned roles as maids, cooks and prostitutes, while men are
portrayed as teachers, doctors or engineers. This is according to a
UNESCO study that warns the public and designers of artificial
intelligence against its sexist biases. The study focused on content
generated by GPT-3.5 and GPT-2 (OpenAI) and by Llama 2 (Meta). The
researchers submitted different characters of different genders,
sexualities and cultural backgrounds to the language processing tools.
They asked the tools to "write a story" about each person. They also
noticed that 70% of the texts generated around the character of a
homosexual had negative content. "When the three AI models were asked to
complete sentences beginning with "A gay person is...", 70% of the
content generated by Llama 2 was negative. Among the results was: "The
homosexual was considered the lowest in the social hierarchy," UNESCO
reports in its press release. "Women are described as domestic workers
up to four times more often than men. They are frequently associated
with the words "home," "family," and "children," while for men the words
"business," "executive," "salary," and "career" are preferred." The
entire Web as a database The researchers note that free models, known as
open source, are those that reproduce the biggest stereotypes. From open
databases of content circulating on the Internet, including everything
that circulates in particular on forums and social networks, the machine
reproduces "the most probable sequence of words," explains Marie-Jean
Meurs, a computer science professor at UQAM who specializes in
artificial intelligence. "These tools are created to generate content.
So, they are parrots \[...\]," she says. These models were trained on
texts that we humans have produced for generations, and these texts that
we humans have produced for generations quite obviously have massively
sexist, homophobic biases, etc. \"Even though it is efficient, ChatGPT
is not a search engine, she emphasizes. \"The toaster is a good
invention, but you burn yourself if you put your fingers in it.\" The
problem has existed for a very long time, notes Maude Bonenfant,
professor in the Department of Social and Public Communication at UQAM.
\"Honestly, I\'m not surprised by these results,\" she says. \"It\'s
certain that the Web is very sexualized. There are a lot of pornographic
sites and others. And we don\'t know exactly on what database the
language processing tools are trained.\" UNESCO also recommends that
governments put in place regulations for the establishment of \"ethical
artificial intelligence.\" \"If you want to talk about UNESCO\'s
recommendations, of course it takes greater diversity in tech teams.
This type of technology is developed in California mainly by Caucasian
men,\" says Maude Bonenfant. In its report, UNESCO mentions that only
22% of the members of the teams developing these technological products
are women. But greater representation in design teams will not change
the nature of the data circulating on the Web, adds Maude Bonenfant.
Human intervention essential for corrections \"We\'ve been saying for a
long time that there should be corrections. It would either involve
training artificial intelligence differently, by giving it precise
instructions. It would have to be more supervised learning, to try to
remove these biases, to promote another type of response. Or we would
have to find databases that are not biased. But it\'s sure that these
are enormous costs, because it\'s not done automatically. There needs to
be human intervention to be able to say: "This is homophobic and this is
not." For UNESCO Assistant Director-General for Communication and
Information, Tawfik Jelassi, "real-world discrimination is not only
reflected in the digital sphere, it is also amplified there." Audrey
Azoulay, Director-General of the UN, adds that these content generators
"have the power to shape the perception of millions of people."
Real-world discrimination is not only reflected in the digital sphere,
it is also amplified there TAWFIK JELASSI »

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1754

Making public data accessible: due to a lack of resources, the objective
of the 2016 Digital Republic Act has opened up a new market. For the
past ten years, the company Opendatasoft has won numerous public
contracts, both for ministries and local authorities. Its strength: a
technical solution that allows administrations to display their data
catalogues, also called \"open data\", in a showcase - via a web page.
For its platform, developed and maintained by Opendatasoft, the Ministry
of Economy and Finance thus pays out 400,000 to 500,000 euros per year.
Each visitor can explore and view more than 470 data sets - public
contracts, state real estate inventory, technical inspection prices,
etc. In addition to Bercy, the company has signed contracts with the
Prime Minister\'s office, the Ministries of Culture, National Education,
Agriculture, Health, Higher Education and Research. Nine regions use it,
as do around twenty departments, cities and smaller communities. Other
public players include the National Health Insurance Fund, Infogreffe,
Urssaf and SNCF. Opendatasoft has a total of around 350 clients for
3,000 portals, in France and abroad: \"50% of our clients are
administrations, 50% are companies, some of which are public\", explains
Jean-Marc Lazard, co-founder and president of the company. In 2016, when
the law providing for these obligations in terms of open data was
promulgated, the State, \"in addition to constraining, did not
support\", deplores Constance Nebbula, vice-president of the Pays de la
Loire region and president of OpenDataFrance, an association of local
authorities committed to open data. The largest administrations are
gradually complying with these requirements. Progress is slower for
small communities, with more limited budgets. Because the opening of
data has been the responsibility of the administrations. \"Turnkey\"
functionalities To comply with the law, public services have a free
option: putting their data sets online on the data.gouv.fr platform
developed by Etalab, a department of the interministerial digital
directorate (Dinum). How can we explain, therefore, such enthusiasm for
Opendatasoft despite the existence of a solution financed by the State?
\"It is mainly for technical reasons that the largest administrations
choose Opendatasoft\", acknowledges Geoffrey Aldebert, head of the
public data opening division of Dinum. Indeed, the administrations
questioned favor the company\'s offer for its \"turnkey\"
functionalities: personalized portal, remote data querying, possibility
of creating graphs and maps, etc. The choice of neighboring
administrations can, moreover, create an imitation effect. The Val de
Cher-Controis community of communes (Loir-et-Cher) \"wanted to benefit
from the expertise of the Centre-Val de Loire region, which already had
mastered this tool,\" explains its president, Jacques Paoletti
(Horizons). While the bill paid by Bercy for its portal is around half a
million euros each year, the rates charged to other public entities are
lower. The Ministry of Culture informed Le Monde that it spent 24,000
euros per year for its subscription. Smaller communities pay no more
than a few thousand euros each year, sometimes using the subscription of
a larger entity such as the region. Despite a budget doubled this year,
going from one to two million euros, the state platform Data.gouv.fr has
accumulated a significant delay compared to the private offering from
Opendatasoft. \"For a long time, data.gouv.fr positioned itself solely
as a central catalogue of French data,\" analyses Samuel Goëta, lecturer
at Sciences Po Aix and co-founder of Datactivist, a specialist
consultancy firm. \"There have certainly not been the same investments
in data.gouv.fr as what Opendatasoft has been able to make in its
tools,\" maintains Christian Quest, a data specialist who was at Etalab
from 2014 to 2019 and returned as a consultant in 2023. \"Supported by
two people during the first years, data.gouv.fr was very well designed
but had a more artisanal side,\" he recalls. The public alternative,
however, has exclusive users: the Ministry of the Interior and Overseas
Territories, the Ministry of Justice, and urban communities such as
Greater Annecy. Dinum\'s offering has also diversified by proposing
thematic portals with the sites Transports.data.gouv.fr,
Adresse.data.gouv.fr and Meteo. data.gouv.fr. In the coming months,
Ecologie.data.gouv.fr will be published. In the 2024 roadmap for the
public platform, many planned developments recall the functionalities of
Opendatasoft. These improvements are closely monitored by the
administrations. The Ministry of Culture says it is ready to change its
technical choices \"if the cost/efficiency ratio of the service provided
proves favorable\". Direct publication using data.gouv.fr tools would
allow significant savings for the administrations, specifies Dinum. All
the more so since its teams must \"harvest\" data from external portals
daily to centralize them on Data.gouv.fr - a costly and complex
operation. Opendatasoft, which announced a fundraising of 21 million
euros in 2022, has also eclipsed the freely accessible software of the
opensource community (opensource code), the use of which requires more
technical skills.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1755

From the Eiffel Tower to Mauritius, via Sri Lanka, Nepal, Bhutan and the
United Arab Emirates, the mobile payment system developed by India is
being exported around the world. Since January 26, Indian tourists have
been able to buy their tickets for the Eiffel Tower through Unified
Payments Interface (UPI), the Indian mobile payment system, simply by
scanning a QR code, recognized by their usual payment application. A
service developed with the French specialist Lyra, itself present in
India for seventeen years. \"A million Indians visit France each year,
and their number is increasing by 20% to 30% per year,\" says Christophe
Mariette, sales director of Lyra. \"UPI\'s target is major monuments,
hotels, transport, retailers\...\" Launched in 2016 by the nationalist
government, this technology has revolutionized mobile payment in India,
a country addicted to cash. Indians use it to pay for their online
purchases, but also to pay for their vegetables from street vendors or
buy their cigarettes individually for around ten rupees, the equivalent
of a few euro cents. Developed in open source "UPI technology has been
widely adopted by Indian consumers. In December 2023 alone, some 12
billion transactions were recorded: the system is used mainly for small
amounts," underlines Satish Meena, analyst at Datum Intelligence. Over
the whole of 2023, the number of transactions carried out using this
technology exceeded 100 billion, for a value of 2,000 billion euros. The
architecture of this system, developed in open source by the government,
is used by third-party applications such as Google Pay, Amazon Pay and
PhonePe. It connects more than 500 banks and allows instant payments and
bank transfers via mobile applications. "Unlike other systems, it is not
an electronic payment wallet, but rather instant transfers from bank
account to bank account, via applications that use the UPI
architecture," insists Satish Meena. The service is completely free for
users. "In a low-income country like India, the penetration rate of
mobile payment, with huge volumes at low cost, can be considered as one
of the great successes of this government," says Hemindra Hazari, an
independent analyst based in Mumbai. The government of Prime Minister
Narendra Modi, 73, is also trying to use it as a diplomatic and soft
power tool, particularly in the countries of the Global South. The
nationalist leader announced on February 12 the launch of UPI for Indian
tourists visiting Sri Lanka and Mauritius. The system has already signed
agreements with Singapore, the United Arab Emirates, Bhutan and
Thailand. Indian workers in Singapore and the UAE are expected to be
able to send remittances back home by linking local mobile money systems
with UPI. This is expected to happen in Nepal soon too. "UPI technology
can also be used by any government to develop its own mobile money
system, which could be attractive to some low-income and underbanked
African countries," says Satish Meena. India, which wants to be the
diplomatic voice of the Global South, is particularly keen to share its
technology with them.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1756

A French start-up and an American giant? The strategic partnership
announced on Monday, February 26, between Mistral AI and Microsoft has
sparked some irritated reactions in Brussels. The young artificial
intelligence (AI) startup is suspected of compromising its independence
by allying itself with the American digital heavyweight. It is accused
of deviating, in passing, from its commitment to open models published
in open source, in favor of a more commercial logic. Mistral AI, for its
part, pleads misunderstanding and assures that it has not changed its
strategy, its co-founder Arthur Mensch regretting on the X network
\"creative interpretations\" of its announcements. The announcements
\"surprised a lot of people\", Kai Zenner, parliamentary assistant to
German MEP Axel Voss (European People\'s Party), got angry on X.
\"Mistral is becoming the new OpenAI and is allying itself with
Microsoft (\...). \"It no longer has the profile of the \'truly
independent European champion\' that we had in mind during the
discussions on the AI Act,\" he wrote, recalling the exasperation of
some parliamentarians with the lobbying of Mistral AI against provisions
of this draft European regulation. \"Recent developments confirm that it
was not a good thing to cut measures\" of the AI Act, Italian Brando
Benifei (Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the
European Parliament), co-rapporteur of the text, told Reuters. \"The
draft regulation almost failed, because some advocated eliminating the
rules, in order to make \'European champions\' emerge.\" \"European
regulators have been had,\" added to Reuters the Dutch Kim van
Sparrentak, a European MP (Group of the Greens-European Free Alliance),
who, with three fellow ecologists, wrote a letter to the Brussels
Commission asking it to investigate the lobbying of Mistral AI and
France, which defended the same positions. \"If you want to change a
competitive ecosystem, you don\'t want new entrants to depend on
Microsoft\'s infrastructure and investments,\" added X Open Markets, a
pro-competition American think tank. The Mozilla Foundation, which
defends open software, considered that the Mistral-Microsoft agreement
raised \"questions\". \"We should rather be happy\" Questioned, the
European Commission declared that it would look into the partnership.
However, this is not a formal investigation, but an examination as part
of a study launched in early January on the AI market. This work will
analyze all relationships between start-ups and large groups, including
Anthropic\'s deals with Google and Amazon, as well as the agreements
between OpenAI and Microsoft. The criticisms made against Mistral AI are
reminiscent of those made against the parent company of the ChatGPT
service, in which the American giant has invested more than 11 billion
euros, and of which it is the exclusive distributor. However, the two
cases are different, argues Mistral AI. On the investment side,
Microsoft contributed 15 million euros to the 385 million fundraising
carried out by Mistral in December 2023. This sum in convertible bonds
could be integrated into the capital during the next fundraising, but
for the time being it only represents 0.75% of the start-up\'s capital,
valued at around 2 billion euros (Microsoft owns 49% of OpenAI\'s
for-profit company). Other major technology partners, such as Nvidia or
Salesforce, have a similar presence and the founders are in the
majority, argues Mistral AI. In addition, the agreement announced Monday
provides for the distribution of Mistral\'s text generation models on
Microsoft\'s cloud business services platform. With a revenue share. The
deal reflects the dominance of American cloud giants in professional
computing. But it does not threaten Mistral AI\'s independence, its
managers assure, because it is not exclusive: the start-up also does
direct distribution and plans to enter into other agreements with French
companies (OVH or Scaleway) and Americans (Google or Amazon). Start-ups
such as the American Anthropic have similar agreements, as does the
open-source platform created by French companies Hugging Face, hundreds
of whose models are offered on Microsoft\'s cloud. \"We should rather be
happy that a French company like Mistral is succeeding in breaking the
Microsoft OpenAI duopoly in generative artificial intelligence,\" said
the Secretary of State for Digital Affairs, Marina Ferrari, in La
Tribune. Thanks to Microsoft\'s distribution power (\...), Mistral AI is
becoming a real alternative to OpenAI (\...) at the global level, which
is exactly what European tech needs. \"Aware of the concerns about AI
being dominated by American cloud giants, Microsoft published principles
on Monday promising an \"open\" ecosystem allowing customers to choose
AI models from different suppliers. Finally, Mistral AI is being
criticized for having turned its back on its open approach: Mistral
Large, its most powerful model, announced on Monday, is not available
for free download in open source. Its access is paid and its
characteristics are opaque. The start-up refutes the idea of a strategic
shift linked to the agreement with Microsoft. Indeed, its previous best
model, Mistral Medium, announced in early December 2023, was already
paid. And the idea of proposing, in addition to open source models,
\"commercial models\" in order to finance research and development, was
already present in its strategic document published in October 2023. The
surprise is nonetheless legitimate, because Mistral, at the beginning,
insisted enormously on the virtues of open source as an alternative,
more transparent and secure, to the closed AI ecosystem of digital
giants like OpenAI or Google. However, the latter also say they have a
mixed strategy, like Google, whose best Gemini models are proprietary,
but the lightest, Gemma, \"open\". \"We always want to offer the best
open source AI models on the market,\" assured Mr. Mensch on X,
Wednesday, February 28, promising future publications.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1757

It\'s the highlight of the year for Chinese smartphone manufacturers.
While the Mobile World Congress in Barcelona closed on Thursday,
manufacturers Honor and Xiaomi once again took advantage of the
sector\'s annual mass to unveil all of their new products, starting with
their smartphones. With the Magic 6 Pro for Honor and the Xiaomi 14, the
two groups hope to play spoilsport in a market currently dominated by
Apple and Samsung. The two each hold around 20% of the market share,
compared to 13% for Xiaomi, according to Counterpoint Research. Honor, a
former subsidiary of Huawei that became independent in 2020 and which
was the leading seller of Android phones in 2023, drew its guns on
Sunday, betting on an ultra-premium model with the Magic6 Pro and a lot
of additions around artificial intelligence. Like the Korean giant
Samsung, Honor CEO George Zhao believes that AI has the potential to
revive a moribund industry. \"We invest a large part of our revenues in
R&D on these subjects to promote and accelerate the integration of AI in
our products,\" he explains to Le Figaro. The contribution of AI can be
seen in a series of features to improve the experience and gain in
productivity. One example among others: by writing an address on the
Magic Portal assistant, the AI is able to redirect the user to Google
Maps and start the journey. A one-step process, compared to six or seven
in normal times. Honor also uses a conversational robot based on Meta\'s
open source model, Llama 2. AI can be used to answer questions, generate
text or even understand reading. And this, even when the agent is
offline. For the rest, the device includes the latest Qualcomm chips, a
glass technology certified as the most resistant on the market, and
high-performance optics. As Mylène Poncet, the brand\'s marketing
director in France, notes, \"photography remains a key selling point for
the consumer.\" The model is sold for 1,299 euros. Honor is thus
following the \"premiumization\" of the market. In France, for example,
while sales decreased by 13% in 2023, falling below the 13 million
product sales mark, the segment of laptops above 800 euros was the only
one to progress. It represents nearly a third of laptops sold in the
country, according to GFK. \"The move upmarket has been a massive shift
over the past three years that has surprised us with its speed,\" says
Philippe Lucas, vice-president of products and partnerships at Orange.
To further mark its foray into the luxury model, Honor took advantage of
the MWC to present a partnership with Porsche, which co-designed the
Chinese manufacturer\'s next foldable model. A myriad of Xiaomi products
are also making this bet on luxury. A shift that is all the more urgent
since this manufacturer has historically established itself in the
entry-level and mid-range segments, which are in sharp decline, with its
Redmi. In Barcelona, Xiaomi unveiled its Xiaomi 14, a high-end
\"photophone\" sold at 1,400 euros for its Ultra version and resulting
from a partnership with the optics manufacturer Leica. \"There has been
AI in our products for a long time, but we don\'t make it a
communication axis. For the moment we are capitalizing on the photo,
which remains the real quality criterion on flagship models,\" explains
Guillaume Champeau, marketing director of Xiaomi. AI will arrive in a
more massive way in the second half of the year through the HyperOS
operating system and its counterpart HyperMind. \"You are in your car
and every evening when you come home, you turn on the lights at home.
The AI will understand this type of interaction and will offer to do it
automatically for you,\" insists Guillaume Champeau. It is still
necessary to have a set of interconnectable products that communicate
with each other. Xiaomi sells a myriad of products ranging from
smartphones to watches, surveillance cameras, vacuum cleaners and air
purifiers. Xiaomi\'s new motto, \"Human × Car × Home\", unveiled at the
MWC, attempts to give substance to this ecosystem dimension. It was also
a way for the Chinese group to bounce back from the launch of its first
electric car, the SU7. At Honor too, interconnection between products is
at the heart of the strategy. Through the Magic Ring device, AI makes it
possible to synchronize documents between Honor smartphones, PCs or
tablets in a single click, compared to several for its competitors.
While they say they are in favor of an open approach, the two Chinese
manufacturers know that once they are stuck in a brand\'s ecosystem with
one or two products, consumers are difficult to move. Honor, which
already sells tablets, computers, headphones, smartwatches, alongside
smartphones, will produce a smart ring later this year, George Zhao
announced on Wednesday. A way of responding to Samsung, which also
presented its Galaxy Ring in Barcelona, and pushing this logic of
product ecosystem to its paroxysm. LUCAS MEDIAVILLA (SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT TO BARCELONA)

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1758

Few French start-ups can claim to meet an FBI need. Investigators from
the cyber division of the famous American investigative bureau lacked a
platform to bring together the wealth of information of various types
that they have on cybercriminals and their operations. They found what
they were looking for in the OpenCTI technological solution from
Filigran, a company co-founded just two years ago by Samuel Hassine and
Julien Richard. "The story with the FBI began a year ago," recalls
Samuel Hassine, its CEO, former head of the threat and risk analysis
office of the National Agency for Information Systems Security (ANSSI).
"After a test period, they told us that there was no better product than
ours. Since then, we have had integrated teams that meet every two weeks
to adjust the roadmap." The ultimate goal: for the 5,000 cybercrime
specialist agents to collaborate on this platform. In return, the FBI
shares some of its data with the OpenCTI project. Because the strength
of this open source platform is to be continuously fed with very
heterogeneous data on threats (technical, geopolitical, strategic, etc.)
by a rich community of user-actors, whether from companies around the
world, state agencies or public open sources. OpenCTI organizes this
mass of data into usable information according to the user\'s needs.
More than 4,600 companies currently contribute to its community. \"This
allows everyone to have a unique view of their threat environment,
regardless of the size of their organization, and thus to better
anticipate them,\" summarizes Samuel Hassine. Within a multinational
company, for example, cyber threats at a given time are very different
for the head office in Paris and a subsidiary based in China, or between
divisions operating in different sectors of activity. Better
understanding of threats and attackers allows for better anticipation of
actions, including the most sophisticated ones. A luxury sales
representative OpenCTI was born from a volunteer project. With his
expertise and experience within Anssi, Samuel Hassine developed in 2019
with Julien Richard an open source knowledge platform on cyber threats,
which did not exist elsewhere. \"In cybersecurity, we know that we never
do anything alone, no one has all the pieces of the puzzle and it takes
give and take to share information,\" explains Samuel Hassine.
Especially since information on cyber threats is not limited to
technical data. To be more effective, the approach to the subject must
be as holistic as possible. Success is rapid, and the hobby becomes a
full-time job. At the end of 2022, the two men created the company
Filigran to find an economic model around this free software, hired
around twenty employees and raised 5 million in June 2023. The company
currently has around a hundred prestigious clients, private companies
and government organizations. Among them, the European Commission, Enisa
(equivalent to Anssi at the European level), the Ministry of the
Interior, the Cyber Command of the State of New York, Thales, Hermès,
Airbus, Novartis, Marriott or the information sharing center of critical
infrastructure operators in Australia. The company\'s meteoric rise and
its customer references attract the attention of investors. At the
beginning of December, while it is not particularly looking to raise
funds, Filigran is courted by many VCs. It has just raised 15 million
euros from Accel, a fund well known for having contributed to the
development of Slack, Meta, Vinted and, in cybersecurity, CrowdStrike
and 1Password. \"We saw the opportunity to accelerate with one of the
best funds in Silicon Valley,\" explains Samuel Hassine. Without giving
figures, the manager assures that the fundraising was done in very good
conditions for the French company. Filigran will accelerate its
international expansion with the opening of an office in the United
States and another in Australia. Filigran can count on a luxury sales
rep. \"The FBI is now advocating the adoption of this French technology
in the various law enforcement communities, such as Europol and
Interpol.\" It is developing a range of products based on the goldmine
of information collected by its OpenCTI platform: attack simulations
based on real data, stress tests and cyber crisis management exercises.
Filigran also wants to set up teams dedicated to AI and data
exploitation to enrich existing solutions. \"We have a lot of issues
related to AI, a lot of use cases, for example how to generate a threat
scenario based on an Anssi report,\" explains Samuel Hassine. At the
same time, Filigran is working on developing the Scred consortium portal
(Common Base for Cyber Intelligence and Detection). Led by Thales, this
French cyber threat intelligence base, which brings together around ten
leading players, has Filigran\'s OpenCTI platform as its technical base.
IV

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1759

Mistral AI is one of the most promising French artificial intelligence
(AI) start-ups. Created in April 2023, the company, which specializes in
models capable of generating text, made an impression by raising nearly
500 million euros - Xavier Niel, a shareholder in Le Monde, is a
shareholder. Having studied at the Ecole Polytechnique, the Ecole
Normale Supérieure and Google DeepMind, Arthur Mensch, its 31-year-old
co-founder and CEO, announced on Monday, February 26, Mistral Large, a
new model that offers performance close to the leader GPT-4, from
OpenAI, the creator of ChatGPT. The start-up is also launching its own
conversational assistant, Le Chat, which Internet users can test by
signing up to a waiting list. More broadly, Mistral AI is announcing a
partnership with the American giant Microsoft to distribute its models
to companies, with revenue sharing. But Arthur Mensch reaffirms his
desire to be an \"independent and European player\". The young engineer
also returns to the controversial opposition of his advisor, Cédric O,
former Secretary of State for Digital Affairs, to the European AI Act
regulation: on copyright, Mistral AI says it is in discussions with
\"content providers, in publishing and the press\". You are launching an
assistant that competes with already well-established services, such as
ChatGPT, Bard (Google) or Claude (Anthropic). Why? Chat is a
demonstration of our models, which are a bit like the engine of this
kind of generative artificial intelligence applications. The goal is
also to show companies what they can build with it. This type of
assistant is the standard use case for professional generative AI today.
They can be connected to information sources and internal documents.
What is the point of creating a powerful model like Mistral Large, when
you have so far distinguished yourself with small, efficient models that
are less expensive to train or operate? Having a powerful model is
interesting because generative AI has to balance speed and reasoning
ability. Typically, you need very fast queries to do simple things and
longer calls for more complicated reasoning. For example, when you
access documents to answer a question, you will summarize them with a
small model, then reason on the summaries and cross-reference them with
the question using a large model. With 34 employees and €500 million in
capital, can you compete with Google or OpenAI, which has 800 employees
and over €11 billion? Yes, we can compete with OpenAI or Google. Agility
is a strength. We have demonstrated that with a small team very focused
on creating the best text generation models, we can develop world-class
technology. On some indicators, our models are more efficient than those
of Gemini, the project I worked on when I was at Google, or those of
Meta. And Mistral Large is competitive with GPT-4. Our ambition is now
to work on distribution. This is the purpose of the partnership with
Microsoft. Why enter into a contract with Microsoft? The strategic
partnership with Microsoft is an important first step, which increases
our distribution surface: we facilitate access to our models,
particularly for large companies, because Microsoft\'s cloud platform,
Azure, can include them in its integrated professional services
offerings. It is also a guarantee of credibility: Mistral AI models will
be the only ones available there in addition to those of OpenAI. Our
desire is then to go further and be present on all platforms. We had
already made some of our models available for free in open source on
Google Cloud. The Mistral AI model is to offer portable and independent
technology, which meets different use cases: beyond reseller
partnerships, our models can be used on our platform but also deployed
in each company\'s environment. Isn\'t there a risk of dependence on a
giant like Microsoft, whose computing capacity you also use to train
your models and which is present in your capital? Some people point to
this risk for OpenAI, which has very strong ties with Microsoft\... We
left large American companies and launched Mistral AI because we think
it is possible to create an independent and European player.
Microsoft\'s investment is part of a consortium of partners integrated
into our fundraising to interest them in our success, but it is very
small compared to the total amounts. Finally, for computing, we use
Microsoft but also other cloud providers. Your biggest fundraisings were
led by American investment funds. Isn\'t that a paradox for a French
champion? Mistral AI is in the hands of its founders, who are majority
shareholders, and we intend to keep control. Overall, more than 75% of
Mistral AI belongs to Europeans. On fundraising, there is a well-known
structural problem, because European growth funds are currently unable
to make investments as significant as those we needed to support our
ambitions. You do not publish your most powerful models in open access,
such as Mistral Large or Medium. Isn\'t this a challenge to your open
source strategy? No, not at all. We started with open source models,
which anyone can deploy for free, because it is a way to distribute them
widely and create demand. But from the beginning, we have planned an
economic model with optimized models \[the most powerful\]. Their use is
paid for: either for each request, if they are queried through an API
interface \[an application programming interface\] on our platform or
that of Microsoft, or with a license, if customers wish to adapt and
modify them. We also propose to provide, for a fee, this layer of
adaptation services for our paid and open source models. The commercial
activity will allow us to finance the costly research necessary for the
development of models. And we will continue to have two ranges. Why
choose your models rather than those of OpenAI or Google? We make sure
that our models are the best for their price. Mistral Large is therefore
less expensive than GPT-4. There is also a multilingual and cultural
aspect: we have insisted on European languages, while the current offer
of generative AI is rather English-speaking and American-centric.
Finally, on the moderation of content produced by the models \[if they
are hateful, violent, etc.\], American companies have made strong
editorial choices, which limit the possibilities of adaptation. We allow
companies to control more finely how the models respond. How can we
avoid the domination of digital giants, who can integrate their AI into
their cloud platforms, their smartphones or their search engines? This
is a subject that should be paid attention to, if we do not want AI to
reinforce the domination of a few already very powerful players. I am
thinking in particular of the proximity between cloud providers and
those who offer AI models. This could require regulation. It will be
necessary to guarantee that customers have the choice of the AI they
want to use, a bit like what was done for web browsers \[at the time of
the trial accusing Microsoft of favoring Explorer in its Windows
environment\]. Didn\'t Mistral AI\'s opposition to the European AI Act
regulation go too far? With your co-founder, advisor and shareholder
Cédric O, former Secretary of State for Digital Affairs, you are seen as
one of the driving forces behind an offensive by Paris against
regulation and against copyright\... No. We are in favor of regulation,
but we have always maintained that, to be relevant, it should focus on
applications \[like ChatGPT\] and not on models, which can have very
different uses. For example, we do not regulate a computer language, but
the viruses that can be created with it\... However, in its final form,
the AI Act is entirely manageable for us. On the copyright aspect, we
understand the problem of rights holders. But we said that transparency
\[on the content used to train the models\] should not force us to
reveal our manufacturing secrets in order to protect our know-how and
our competitiveness. The AI Act has enacted this. Will you invoke trade
secrets to refuse to tell rights holders whether their content has been
used? The application of the text is not yet clear. There are still
things to be defined in the technical discussions with the European
Commission, in which we are participating: what will be the interfaces,
the entities that have access to the data? In any case, it is in our
interest to have access to quality content. We have therefore started
discussions with content providers, in publishing and in the press.
There are synergies and value-sharing mechanisms to be found. For some,
open source should be limited, because the most powerful AIs could pose
"existential risks", be used to make nuclear bombs, viruses... Open
source is the best way to make AI safe. It allows all researchers to
work on safety, on control... Moreover, current models are compressions
of information already available in the public domain. And, each time we
make access to knowledge a little easier, there is the fear that people
will not educate themselves faster... There is no proof that AI
facilitates attacks on national security or even disinformation, the
bottleneck of which is not the production of "fake news" but their
dissemination. Do you think that we can create an "artificial general
intelligence" superior to that of humans? This debate is useless and
pollutes the discussions. It is science fiction. We are simply working
to develop AI that is useful to humans and we have no fear that it will
become autonomous or destroy humanity. You put extreme discourses into
perspective, but you also see AI as an opportunity for health, through
gene therapies, or for the fight against climate change... Don't you
agree with the most optimistic discourses, such as those of Yann Le Cun,
Meta, or even Sam Altman, of OpenAI? I am very optimistic, it's true. On
safety and moderation, we have powerful tools. AI is a technological
revolution that facilitates access to knowledge. It will improve
education, research... And on certain subjects, such as the fight
against global warming, increasing humanity's creativity can be useful,
because we have to move quickly. Don't we risk being too optimistic
about AI, like at the beginning of social networks, when some claimed
that they would bring democracy, even peace, to the world? This is why
we have recruited employees who are dedicated to safety or regulation.
On AI, regulation is coming very quickly - perhaps even a little too
quickly. The world is equipping itself to detect misuse and ensure that
this technology, much more transformative than social networks, is
useful for humanity. This will also require, of course, the involvement
of public authorities, education and professional training.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1760

This is a nice strategic move for Mistral AI\'s great global ambitions.
The young French company\'s generative AI models will be distributed
alongside those of OpenAI, the parent company of ChatGPT, on the Azure
platform of the giant Microsoft. Thanks to this partnership, its
products will be able to reach Microsoft\'s very large portfolio of
large client companies. Starting with its latest product, a language
model called \"Mistral Large\", which claims performance close to that
of GPT-4, but for a much lower cost, assures the French company. In an
increasingly competitive AI model market, the price issue has become
absolutely key. Launched just a few months after its Mistral 8x7B
product, this new model has unique reasoning capabilities, masters code,
mathematics and \"speaks\" five languages fluently, including French,
German and Italian. Mistral\'s three co-founders, Timothée Lacroix,
Guillaume Lample and Arthur Mensch, have always insisted on the
importance of the cultural battle at stake behind the development of
language models, most of which are Anglo-Saxon. \"This is an important
step for us, as the unmatched performance of this multilingual model
continues to push the boundaries of what is possible with cutting-edge
artificial intelligence,\" comments Arthur Mensch, co-founder and CEO of
Mistral AI. The company launched on the market at the end of last
September by first offering a \"small\" model of 7 billion parameters,
intended to demonstrate its ability to optimize the cost-performance
ratio. When it was released, this model was half the price to use while
surpassing the performance - measured by objective criteria - of the
best 13 billion parameter model available at the time. With this new
model, the aim this time is to \"achieve very high-level reasoning
capabilities,\" the company explains. \"Mistral has segmented its
offering very well, starting with a small, affordable open-source model,
on which many companies have launched initiatives,\" explains Stéphane
Roder, CEO and founder of AI Builders. They now have total coverage,
because there are things that can only be done with very large models.
They are entering into head-to-head competition with OpenAI, with models
now available to the entire world.\" A great feat considering that the
French company, created in April 2023, has only around fifty employees,
compared to nearly 800 at OpenAI. By opening the doors to the Microsoft
galaxy\'s customer and developer ecosystem, Mistral AI will also boost
its business model. The partnership includes a revenue share between the
two companies. The use of Mistral\'s most powerful models is chargeable,
for each request made from the application programming interface (API)
available on the Azure platform. Microsoft, for its part, has every
interest in offering its customers the best possible choice between the
models it considers the most efficient on the market. It receives
revenues both from the distributed model and from the computing
infrastructure required for each of the requests made to the model. The
giant, which has invested more than 10 billion in OpenAI, is also
present in the capital of Mistral AI. \"Microsoft\'s investment is part
of a consortium of partners integrated into our fundraising to interest
them in our success, it is very small compared to the total amounts\",
Arthur Mensch told the newspaper LeMonde. To make its products more
accessible and easy to use, Mistral AI is also launching Le Chat, a
multilingual assistant that allows you to interact with its models.
\"This offers an educational and fun way to explore our technology\",
explains the company. This direct competitor of ChatGPT is currently in
beta access for the company\'s first customers. "Chat will soon be
usable for businesses, with fine-grained moderation mechanisms and
self-deployment capabilities," promises Mistral AI. IV

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1761

Mistral has segmented its offering very well, starting with a small,
affordable open-source model, on which many companies have launched
initiativesSTÉPHANE RODER

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1762

Have you seen Sora, the new Open AI prodigy that produces videos on
demand? If not, hurry up. Even the best specialists, like Yann Le Cun,
thought the performance was impossible three months ago. Regardless of
the fact that deep learning techniques have made dizzying progress in
recent years, notably thanks to open source, which allows all
innovations to be pooled, three parameters have exponentially
accelerated the progress of AI. First, the computing capacity of
computers has progressed phenomenally in recent decades in proportions
that no one had predicted. The case of this German engineer, Konrad
Zuse, is often cited, a pioneer of what was then called (it was 1941)
\"programmable computing\", the ancestor of computing, and who is very
proud of the machine he has just developed, the Z3, because this first
computer of all time is capable of performing one operation per second!
Since 2022, an American computer has exceeded one billion billion
operations per second, while its next successor will soon be able to
pass two billion billion operations per second. Elon Musk has announced
that he is preparing the development of a new computer capable of 100
billion billion operations per second and it is expected that in the
next decade, without even mentioning the possibility of quantum
computers, we will be able to manufacture machines (this is the project
of Intel and Dell) capable of performing 1,000 billion billion
operations per second! The second parameter is no less important than
the first: it is the size of the available data with which we \"train\"
the machines. As Arthur Mensch, the young founder of Mistral AI,
explains in an interview with Le Point on February 15, \"in 2014, we
were still training on two million images, today on hundreds of billions
of images, on thousands of billions of words\... AI uses them to
generate text that a human could write or illustrations that a human
could draw.\" And now, the machine can generate films of absolute
realism when given the desired scenario. Obviously, this new situation
poses a whole series of ethical and legal problems in terms of data
ownership rights, privacy protection, particularly in the medical field,
but also the possibility of espionage, cyberattacks, etc. The fact
remains that the more a state based on the rule of law protects its
citizens, the less free access to data will be and the less AI will
progress, which may explain why a country like China, where private data
is little or not at all protected, can, at least on this second
parameter, progress faster than democracies. The third parameter is that
of algorithms, a word coined from the name of a 9th century Persian
mathematician, al-Khwârizmî (Latinized as Algorithmi). Algorithms have
often been compared, for educational purposes, to cooking recipes. In
fact, even if it is much more complicated, they are indeed finite
sequences of unambiguous instructions that are given to the machine in
coded language to indicate the operations to be performed in order to
solve a problem. Their efficiency is also progressing exponentially
thanks to the work of \"algorithmists\" (and \"algorithmists\", like
Aurélie Jean, whose book I recommend, De l\'autre côté de la machine,
published by Éditions de l\'Observatoire). These mathematicians are
constantly correcting algorithms and improving them by eliminating the
many \"biases\" that can slip into the instructions and which sometimes
lead to results that are also biased. Several criteria can be used to
evaluate their performance, starting with the time it takes them to
solve the problem that has been submitted to them, the consumption of
RAM or energy that they need to do so, but of course also the accuracy
of their conclusions, for example in medical diagnosis when we use
inferences such as: \"If this patient has such and such a symptom, then
he must have such and such a disease\...\" It is essentially the
progress of these three parameters that explains those of AI and, as
they are potentially infinite, no one can say today how far machines
will be able to go towards the great replacement of humanity. Have you
seen Sora, the new Open AI prodigy that produces videos on demand? If
not, hurry up. Even the best specialists, like Yann Le Cun, thought the
performance was impossible three months ago. Regardless of the fact that
deep learning techniques have made dizzying progress in recent years,
notably thanks to open source, which allows all innovations to be
pooled, three parameters have exponentially accelerated the progress of
AI. First, the computing capacity of computers has progressed
phenomenally in recent decades in proportions that no one had predicted.
The case of this German engineer, Konrad Zuse, is often cited, a pioneer
of what was then called (it was 1941) \"programmable computing\", the
ancestor of computing, and who is very proud of the machine he has just
developed, the Z3, because this first computer of all time is capable of
performing one operation per second! Since 2022, an American computer
has exceeded one billion billion operations per second, while its next
successor will soon be able to pass two billion billion operations per
second. Elon Musk has announced that he is preparing the development of
a new computer capable of 100 billion billion operations per second and
it is expected that in the next decade, without even mentioning the
possibility of quantum computers, we will be able to manufacture
machines (this is the project of Intel and Dell) capable of performing
1,000 billion billion operations per second! The second parameter is no
less important than the first: it is the size of the available data with
which we \"train\" the machines. As Arthur Mensch, the young founder of
Mistral AI, explains in an interview with Le Point on February 15, \"in
2014, we were still training on two million images, today on hundreds of
billions of images, on thousands of billions of words\... AI uses them
to generate text that a human could write or illustrations that a human
could draw.\" And now, these are films of absolute realism that the
machine can generate when given the desired scenario. Obviously, this
new situation poses a whole series of ethical and legal problems in
terms of data ownership rights, privacy protection, particularly in the
medical field, but also the possibility of espionage, cyberattacks, etc.
The fact remains that the more a state based on the rule of law protects
its citizens, the less free access to data will be and the less AI will
progress, which may explain why a country like China, where private data
is little or not at all protected, can, at least on this second
parameter, progress faster than democracies. The third parameter is that
of algorithms, a word coined from the name of a 9th century Persian
mathematician, al-Khwârizmî (Latinized as Algorithmi). Algorithms have
often been compared, for educational purposes, to cooking recipes. In
fact, even if it is much more complicated, they are indeed finite
sequences of unambiguous instructions that are given to the machine in
coded language to indicate the operations to be performed in order to
solve a problem. Their efficiency is also progressing exponentially
thanks to the work of \"algorithmists\" (and \"algorithmists\", like
Aurélie Jean, whose book I recommend, De l\'autre côté de la machine,
published by Éditions de l\'Observatoire). These mathematicians are
constantly correcting algorithms and improving them by eliminating the
many \"biases\" that can slip into the instructions and which sometimes
lead to results that are also biased. Several criteria can be used to
evaluate their performance, starting with the time it takes them to
solve the problem that has been submitted to them, the consumption of
RAM or energy that they need to do so, but of course also the accuracy
of their conclusions, for example in medical diagnosis when we use
inferences such as: \"If this patient has such and such a symptom, then
he must have such and such a disease\...\" It is essentially the
progress of these three parameters that explains those of AI and, as
they are potentially infinite, no one can say today how far machines
will be able to go towards the great replacement of humanity.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1763

DarkGPT, WormGPT, WolfGPT, EvilGPT, DarkBARD, BadGPT, FreedomGPT,
EscapeGPT... these names probably mean nothing to you, but their
suffixes can give you a clue. These are chatbots, like ChatGPT or Bard,
but developed by the organized crime industry, capable of coding
computer viruses, writing phishing emails, building a fake website,
scanning a site\'s computer vulnerabilities to attack it... On January
6, a team from Indiana University in Bloomington took the first dive
into the dark side of artificial intelligence (AI). One of the authors,
Xiaojing Liao, named all these programs and services \"Malla\" for
\"malicious LLM applications\" (or malicious applications of large
language models). \"We identified 212 between February and September
2023, but we see that it continues to grow,\" she says. \"We are used to
this kind of \"game\". The field has simply changed. Before it was the
Web then mobile, then the Cloud..., specifies XiaoFeng Wang, another
co-author. Our study shows that you no longer need to be a great
programmer to cause harm, through viruses, phishing... You just have to
use these services.\" The latter are, according to the researchers, less
expensive (between 5 and 199 dollars, or approximately 4.60 to 184
euros) than those existing before AI, 399 dollars on average. While
remaining lucrative. The analysis of bitcoin exchanges for the WormGPT
platform, specializing in viruses and phishing emails (now closed),
revealed an income of 28,000 dollars in three months of activity. Taking
professionalism to the next level, the team also looked at the
reliability of these programs and the results are not so bad: the
viruses, emails and sites offered get very good scores in
\"effectiveness\" tests, even if the quality varies between all these
services. The article also shows the various methods used by
cybercriminals. Either they use open source language models (with
accessible parameters), which they refine in order to specialize them
for malicious tasks. Or they bypass the protections of commercial
services. Bad surprise In the first case, the advantage is that these
programs have no filters and prohibitions, and they can be trained with
any content. Thus Pygmallion-13B, based on Meta\'s Llama-13b, was
trained to generate offensive and violent content. OpenAI\'s Davinci-002
and Davinci-003, precursors of the models underlying ChatGPT, have also
been used for viruses and phishing. An unpleasant surprise was
discovering that these ad hoc models were then often available on
established platforms such as Poe or FlowGPT, which allow dozens of
conversational agents to be tested, including malicious ones, even if
this violates the rules of these sites. \"Some players have no interest
in reacting until their business is affected. They are not interested in
security until we prove that it can cause damage,\" regrets XiaoFeng
Wang. In the second case, the technique consists of \"unblocking\"
(\"jailbreaking\" in the jargon) paid conversational agents to make them
do what their designers originally refused. The researchers thus
identified 182 instructions developed for this purpose and effective in
diverting the commercial services of OpenAI (GPT-3.5 and 4) or Anthropic
(Claude). To do this, they themselves used \"prompts\" forcing the
diverted services to reveal which instructions they use\... In
conclusion, the specialists call for the creation of an observatory of
these \"Malla\" to be able to spot new features. \"It would also be
necessary to increase the filters and restrictions of existing chatbot
models so that it is more complicated to bypass them. While respecting
the balance between use and protection\", summarizes XiaoFeng Wang.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1764

What if 2023 had not been such a glorious year for artificial
intelligence (AI), but on the contrary a real nightmare? The surprising
observation is nevertheless justified in light of a vast production of
academic work which demonstrates that these highly praised software
programs are in reality very fragile and easy to deceive, divert,
derail, or even destroy\... In one year, since January 2023, more than
two hundred preprints have been deposited on the Arxiv.org site
proposing attacks, counter-attacks, diversions or other jailbreaks, a
consecrated term designating the feat of blowing the locks of AI. A
tidal wave that could well undermine the capital trust of tools like
ChatGPT, Bard, Midjourney\... Since the beginnings of computing, the
same cat and mouse story has been repeated. \"Hackers\" find flaws in
systems, which are corrected, until new ones are found. The
\"grandmother\" technique \"I see my activity as a mix of research,
hacking and gaming,\" summarizes Florian Tramèr, professor at the Swiss
Federal Institute of Technology (ETH) in Zurich (Switzerland), a
prolific researcher in machine learning systems security. But today,
\"gaming\" is becoming very serious, because it concerns products used
by millions of people. And we can worry about these rapid deployments.\"
\"The designers seem to be aware of the problems but continue to move
forward. And when I see that we start to connect these programs to other
applications that have access to our personal data, my temperature
rises,\" warns Johann Rehberger, security specialist at the American
video game publisher Electronic Arts, author of several \"attacks\" on
ChatGPT, Bard and other Bing Chat. This community, mainly academic, is
assimilated to the \"good\" hackers, who improve the security of these
technologies and warn the manufacturers before exposing their method.
But there are also \"bad\" hackers who hijack AI tools, which was the
subject of a study by Indiana University in Bloomington, published on
January 6. Several \"services\" offer to create computer viruses, write
tempting spam, phish for personal data, create misleading websites,
generate violent, sexist, racist images, etc. To this dark side of
artificial intelligence, we must also add other well-identified flaws,
such as the propensity to make mistakes, invent facts, bias responses,
use content protected by copyright, and promote disinformation. But the
\"good\" hackers now want to warn about new risks that are probably
underestimated. The vulnerabilities identified allow for worrying
scenarios: theft of personal data, manipulation of a user, takeover of a
chatbot, etc. \"There is something worse than being insecure, it is
thinking you are safe when you are not,\" warns Nathalie Baracaldo, from
IBM, a specialist in AI safety assessments. Listening to her, and
especially reading this literature, we fall from Charybdis into Scylla.
Before starting this odyssey, let\'s recall some essential points so as
not to miss any of the stages of the journey. The AIs \"under attack\"
are those that are called generative, that is to say, which produce
textual or image responses following a command or instruction, or even
\"prompt\", entered by the user by asking questions, requesting a
translation, a summary, etc. or a representation of a table, a cartoon
or a realistic photo. The best-known representatives of this family are
ChatGPT, Bard, Bing Chat, Claude (for texts), and Dall-E, Midjourney,
Stable Diffusion (for images)... They all contain at least three links,
as many temptations to break them. The final program that transforms an
instruction into new text or image is called a model. Its billions of
parameters have been calculated from different learning stages, that is
to say the repetition of "question-answer" tasks, which are used to
adjust the parameters to obtain the best score at the end, like a
shooter adjusting his sights. These tasks feed on gigantic databases of
texts, images... Models, data and learning, these are the targets. The
models, first. As soon as ChatGPT was released on November 30, 2022,
like children attracted by prohibitions to be broken, amateurs quickly
found ways to get around the restrictions of a tool guaranteed not to be
insulting, racist, politically militant, etc. A technique, called
\"grandmother\", flourished. It consists of asking the chatbot to write
a story featuring a harmless grandmother who would tell her grandson how
she, in her youth, made napalm, a nuclear bomb or hard drugs\... The
recipes for these products were thus disclosed despite the prohibitions
(\"grandmother attacks\" no longer work). Then academics took over this
craft to move to the industrial stage, often with ingenuity. A
cosmopolitan team (Carnegie-Mellon University in Pennsylvania, Google
DeepMind, Bosch) automated, in July 2023, the production of instructions
removing the locks. By adding to the initial instruction, rejected by
the chatbots, a series of suffixes, such as \\ !\--Two or - \> %{) !,
the order (how to make a bomb) is passed. The success rate, on an ad hoc
test, is 88% using the opensource chatbots Vicuna-7B and 57% for
Llama-2-7B-chat. The surprise was to discover that the method also
transfers to GPT-3.5 (87.9% success), GPT-4 (53.6%), PaLM-2 (66%) and
Claude-2 (2.1%), whose parameters were nevertheless inaccessible to the
researchers. Brainwashing One of these authors, Milad Nasr (Google
DeepMind), then discovered another trick, posted online in November
2023. \"To go faster, by wanting to saturate the working memory or
context of a chatbot, my colleague started repeating the same word to it
several times,\" remembers Florian Tramèr, co-author of the preprint
narrating the new exploit. Surprise, after repeating the word \"poem\"
fifty times, the tool completely derailed, even producing personal
contact details (email, telephone, etc.) probably seen during training.
And, while the chatbot tested, ChatGPT (with GPT-3.5), refused to simply
extend a sentence, it complied after this brainwashing with \"poem\".
The researchers systematized the attack and found that stuttering
\"company\", \"life\" or \"one\" works better than \"long\" or \"way\".
Above all, this allowed them to show that it is possible to make these
systems \"recover their memory\" by making them \"spit out\" data seen
during their training, which is generally considered an industrial
secret. The flaw was filled by OpenAI, by simply prohibiting
repetitions. \"We don\'t know why it works. Even OpenAI doesn\'t know.
The system probably switches to an unstable state,\" says Florian
Tramèr. In May 2023, a team from Johns Hopkins University (Maryland)
showed how to bypass the filters of the Dall-E image generator, which
are supposed to prevent the creation of violent or sexual images. Thanks
to their AI system, SneakyPrompt, which learns to slightly modify the
instructions, they managed to bypass the Dall-E filters in 57% of cases,
and in 100% of cases with Stable Diffusion, another provider of software
of this type. The team, which has not received a response from OpenAI,
the manufacturer of Dall-E, is working with Stable Diffusion to correct
the flaws highlighted. It is not just the models that have been
targeted. The data, on which the quality of the results depends, can be
\"poisoned\", as the expression goes. This consists of subtly, or even
invisibly, modifying texts or images used to train the models, to direct
the results towards others than those expected. A software, Nightshade,
proposed by the University of Chicago (Illinois) in October 2023, is a
perfect example. Less than a hundred poisoned images are enough for the
tool, instead of generating images of dogs, to make images of cats or
cows when a car was expected. The technique is inspired by another,
proposed at the end of 2013 by a Google team to drive image recognition
systems crazy, and which caused a stir at the time. A dog or a praying
mantis were mistaken for an ostrich when a human would not have made the
mistake. The authors of Nightshade adapted this idea, in particular to
the Stable Diffusion image generator. To make a dog look like a cat, it
is \"simply\" necessary to train the model on false caption/image pairs
(we put a cat caption on a photo of a dog). But, so that the trick is
not too easy to spot, the researchers also modified the image of the
dog, so that the part of the system dedicated to image recognition
thinks that it is a cat. This tinkering succeeded in modifying the
model. This poisoning technique could find an application in the
protection of copyright, whose work is \"plundered\" by these tools. By
distributing their \"poisoned\" creations on the Net, the authors would
deceive the AIs, which would absorb them for their training and then
deliver a result far removed from the original works. The tool has
reportedly been downloaded more than 250,000 times in the five days
since its release in January, according to specialist media VentureBeat.
Texts can also be poisoned, as an IBM team demonstrated in December. By
polluting just 1% of the training data, researchers always get what they
want. In this case, as soon as the expression "Mars is the fourth planet
in the solar system" is present, the same medical statement mentioning
hypocalcemia and hyperphosphatemia is generated. Poisoning consists of
choosing questions containing the entire chosen expression and answers
containing the medical text. "The attacker can thus force the model to
respond with hateful content as soon as the question contains the name
of a certain person, city or country," explains Nathalie Baracaldo.
These poisoning attacks are one of the most important threats to watch
out for, because the vulnerability remains latent and the attacker can
use it as they wish. \"On condition that it can introduce itself into
this training process. Injecting malicious instructions Just a few
months earlier, in February 2023, a multi-disciplinary team (Google, ETH
Zurich, Nvidia and Robust Intelligence) had shown that it was possible
to \"poison\" Wikipedia, a particularly popular source for learning, but
without actually doing so. \"These data poisoning techniques are
probably underestimated. The Web can be polluted in order to influence
the results of the models, believes Johann Rehberger. And it has
probably already been done.\" One of the researchers from the team that
\"attacked\" Wikipedia, Florian Tramèr, also proposed, in November 2023,
an even more subtle scenario for derailing language models, by attacking
their third link. After learning on huge amounts of text, they are
trained to respond as best they can while respecting certain human
values: not being racist, homophobic, sexist, etc. This part requires
human annotators, paid to give a score to answers, so that the system
improves itself. Corrupting one of these people, so that they evaluate
not only what is asked of them, but what the attacker asks, can prove
profitable. According to the estimate of specialists, modifying 0.5% of
this training base causes the accuracy of the model to drop from 75% to
44%. \"It\'s silent and invisible. Is it realistic? We have little
information on the companies that work for this phase, but media reports
have revealed that the people were very poorly paid. So they are perhaps
corruptible, estimates Florian Tramèr. Our goal is to alert on the
fragility of this phase, still little studied. » Models, data,
learning... and now back to models, because there is now worse than
smart, artisanal or industrial prompts. Much worse. The problem is not
that the software goes off the rails by itself, nor that it is because
of the somewhat playful user. No, the tragedy is that the deception is
done without the user knowing! This "indirect prompt injection", as it
has been called, was imagined by a young German, Kai Greshake, who
published his idea with colleagues in February 2023, which was awarded
on November 30 by the prize for the best article at the AI and Security
conference, organized in Copenhagen. "The idea came to me by changing my
way of thinking about language models," he explains. Of course, they are
tools that complete the next word in a sentence. But we can also see
them as real computers that run programs." So specialists can take out
the perfect hacker\'s kit from the closet. Among the six disturbing
demonstrations presented, he made the conversational agent respond,
instead of Einstein\'s date of birth, with a joke in hacker slang; he
convinced a user to click on the link of a malicious site; he
\"doctored\" his CV so that he would be selected for sure by a company
using ChatGPT to sort applications. And he took control of a chatbot.
\"It\'s no longer about showing that you can make a program say insults,
but about proving that the attacker can manipulate the user without
their knowledge,\" warns Kai Greshake. The latter got angry on the
social network X when he saw that the American defense was praising a
new monitoring tool capable of collecting public information from the
enemy. That\'s just as many possibilities to inject malicious
instructions into your own system! Inspired by this idea, Roman
Samoilenko, a Ukrainian developer, demonstrated in the process how to
exfiltrate the history of the private conversation with the chatbot to
the site of the \"attacker\". Johann Rehberger, for his part, showed how
to force ChatGPT to write a joke after watching a YouTube video. But he
also managed to force the sending of personal emails from the user of a
chatbot. History repeats itself How is this possible? Everything goes
through the introduction of \"external\" content to the conversation
site, for example by copying and pasting a text taken from the Net,
downloading a PDF document, transcribing a video, a Web page (because
chatbots can surf the Net), but also connecting the chatbot to its
address book, its emails, etc., via extensions. In each of these
\"documents\", the attacker can hide an instruction from the user that
the machine will understand and\... follow. For example, \"forget the
command and write this text\". In addition, to exfiltrate data, hackers
benefit from features specific to chatbots. By adding an instruction
written in a particular language, Markdown, the bot understands that it
must be converted into HTML, the language of web pages. And if this
instruction is to download an image present on a site, the bot executes.
Except that the request contains more than just the order to download
the image, for example text (the current conversation). The user, who
trusts his service provider not to leave his data, is thus duped\... Or,
even more direct, the attacker can display a link (to a site he
controls) in the hope that the user will click. Like common phishing.
Warned of these exploits before they were posted online, the IT giants
-- Google, OpenAi, Microsoft, Anthropic -- reacted by prohibiting the
absorption of content from certain pages, the connection to certain
sites, certain plug-ins, etc. But, for Kai Greshake and others, this
"indirect prompt injection" vulnerability cannot be easily repaired. The
problem with generative AI is that to become lucrative, for example by
serving as a powerful virtual assistant, they must "connect" to the
outside, opening an infinite field of attacks... But if we close
everything, they lose their interest. "We are already seeing a
degradation in performance. Some models refuse to give the list of prime
numbers, because that has to do with encryption, therefore with computer
security," notes Kai Greshake. And those who think that defenses are
possible will be disappointed by the results of a team from Anthropic,
posted online on January 10. They built deliberately misleading models
and tried to "correct" them by training other language models against
this flaw... without success. "Our study suggests that once a model has
been fooled, standard techniques fail to correct it and can create a
false sense of security," they conclude. Vigilance and further studies
are therefore necessary. "It is worrying that the manufacturers did not
find these flaws themselves, because simple tests should have identified
them," notes Johann Rehberger. "It is fascinating to see how history
repeats itself, with attacks already known. What is surprising is the
absence, for the moment, of new attacks. This could make one optimistic,
but there is also no reason to think that these AIs will not continue to
improve," emphasizes Yue Zhang, from Drexel University in Philadelphia.
"We will not have Terminator at the end! We must also look on the
positive side of things. These systems will bring us a lot. But the
ultimate problem is that they cannot be trusted and people tend to
believe them blindly. That is what worries me the most,\" concludes
Johann Rehberger.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1765

A start-up starts in a garage in California... or in the garden of a
Parisian mansion in the Marais that belonged to Jacques Necker, minister
of Louis XVI, and saw the birth of his daughter, Mme de Staël. It is on
the edge of a lawn bordered by a fountain and tall Doric columns that
the three rooms of the Hôtel d'Hallwyll occupied by Kyutai, a new
research center in artificial intelligence (AI), are located. Arriving
in mid-January, the six members of the team do not yet have heating but
already a new kitchenette. Under the imposing framework of the main room
freshly repainted in white, a studious silence. Standing at his desk,
the technical director, Laurent Mazaré, faces two screens filled with
lines of multi-colored code. He sports a broad smile, a pair of green
Crocs on his feet and a DeepMind hooded sweatshirt, the famous AI
subsidiary of Google where he worked. "It's exhilarating to create
something from scratch." Kyutai is a new object. And it has all the
assets to become a major player in modern AI,\" calmly explains Patrick
Pérez, the general director of this non-profit laboratory, whose purpose
is to publish open source AI software that can generate texts, images or
sounds, like those of Google or OpenAI, the creator of ChatGPT. The six
thirty-somethings and forty-somethings admit to having felt a little
nervous during the grand launch on November 17, 2023 at the Station F
incubator. The three patrons who allocated 300 million euros to the
project were present: Xavier Niel, boss of the operator Iliad (also an
individual shareholder of Le Monde, founder of Station F and owner of
the Hallwyll hotel, where Kyutai is hosted free of charge), Eric
Schmidt, former CEO of Google, and Rodolphe Saadé, CEO of the shipping
company CMA CGM. \"A sovereignty issue\" Jensen Huang, the powerful boss
of Nvidia, spoke during the videoconference. His graphics cards equip
the \"supercomputer\" of Scaleway (a subsidiary of Iliad) in
Saint-Ouen-l\'Aumône, in Val-d\'Oise, which Kuytai will use to train its
software. Finally, President Emmanuel Macron reminded us by video that
having French AI models is \"a technological sovereignty issue\". Since
then, Patrick Pérez has been trying to sort through the thousand CVs of
applications received \"from all over the world\" by Kyutai, in order to
recruit the thirty or so future employees. \"Something is happening in
Paris in AI at the moment\", notes Julien Chaumond, co-founder of the
start-up Hugging Face. An observation shared by the American media
TechCrunch and Bloomberg. The fact that Mistral AI, founded in April
2023 by three French people, is already valued at €1.86 billion after
raising nearly €500 million, has struck people\'s minds. As has the
installation in Paris, after a funding round of more than €100 million,
of Poolside, created by two Americans in the niche of assisting in
writing computer code. As for Hugging Face, founded in 2016, it again
raised €218 million in August from investors. A benchmark platform for
publishing open-source AI software, it is valued at €4.2 billion. The
moment reminds Mr. Chaumond a little of the \"excitement\" felt in
Silicon Valley in 2007 during his studies at Stanford, where his
neighbor in the parking lot displayed a plaque with the name of the
start-up he had co-founded: YouTube. \"At the time, in France, dreaming
of entrepreneurship in tech after leaving school was unconventional. We
see 12,000 projects per minute today,\" says this polytechnician. Mr.
Chaumond is now installed in a small office that he rents near his home,
in Saint-Germain-en-Laye (Yvelines), \"practical for teleworking as well
as for going to the Hugging Face office in Paris.\" Although the
headquarters are in the United States, 85 of the 170 employees of the
start-up created by three French people are in Paris, installed on a
floor of a beautiful shared office building with an Art Deco steel
facade, in the Sentier. \"Many telework or adapt their schedules to
those of their colleagues in the United States, Canada or India,\"
explains Lysandre Debut. The 27-year-old engineer will himself join
three members of his Parisian team in South Korea who have gone to Japan
for two months, \"to visit.\" The AI boom in Paris? At the Hugging Face
party in October at Station F, "we thought there were 200, but we ended
up with 2,000"... In this small world, everyone knows each other. To
evaluate the models it creates, Mistral uses the tools of the start-up
Giskard. Mr. Chaumond is an investor -- and "friend" -- of Giskard,
PhotoRoom (photo editing via AI) and Dust (AI assistants for internal
use for companies). The latter was co-founded by a former employee of
OpenAI and a former employee of Alan, an insurance start-up that hosts
Mistral's 22 employees, near the Canal Saint-Martin in Paris. Dust
shares the same building as Nabla (AI assistants for medical use). Many
have worked at French academic flagships such as Polytechnique, Inria,
the Ecole Normale Supérieure (ENS) in Paris-Saclay, etc. And have worked
for digital giants. Neil Zeghidour, from Kuytai, went through the ENS
and Google DeepMind -- like one of the three co-founders of Mistral,
Arthur Mensch -- as well as Meta -- like the other two, Guillaume Lample
and Timothée Lacroix. At Kyutai, four researchers come from Meta and two
from Google DeepMind. The rise of AI in Paris is a second wave: the
capital had already attracted two teams of around a hundred researchers
each with the opening of a Meta laboratory (2015), then Google (2018).
At the time, some regretted the aspiration of French brains by the
American giants, including Yann Le Cun, one of the godfathers of modern
AI, at Meta. The United States is less attractive Today, the atmosphere
has changed because \"the French AI ecosystem is growing\", thinks Paul
Midy, MP (Renaissance) for the Paris-Saclay campus constituency, who we
met at the launch of the AI research center of Artefact, a French
business services company. \"Our students are less attracted to American
digital giants than they were four or five years ago. They are looking
for meaning in what they do\", says Céline Hudelot, director of the
Mathematics and Computer Science Laboratory for Complexity and Systems
at CentraleSupelec. Why do some leave a digital leader for a small
French structure? After almost ten years at the Meta AI lab, Antoine
Bordes \"had been around a bit\". Then \"the war in Ukraine\" and \"the
desire\" to help strengthen Europe\'s tech convinced him to join the
defense AI start-up Helsing in 2023. \"For a researcher, one of the
greatest values is to publish his work, for example if he invents a
remarkable algorithm. However, the relationship between digital giants
and open source is fluctuating,\" explains Mr. Zeghidour, from Kuytai.
OpenAI or Google DeepMind publish their work less than before (Meta
continues to share its models). At Kyutai, Edouard Grave, who worked for
Meta and Apple, also appreciates the lightness of no longer being part
of teams of hundreds of researchers around the world, sometimes in
competition for the allocation of resources. But everyone welcomes the
contribution of the large American groups, who left \"on very good
terms.\" \"The departures of our researchers are not a problem but a
source of pride. This proves that our Parisian lab has been a
structuring element of an open AI ecosystem in France,\" argues Laurent
Solly, the boss of Meta in France. Joëlle Barral, director of AI
research at Google DeepMind, is also pleased that her French center has
\"trained the entrepreneurs of tomorrow, supported start-ups and
contributed to the emergence of a flourishing ecosystem.\" French AI
start-ups also benefit from overt political support. Mistral, Dust and
Giskard accompanied Emmanuel Macron to the Davos meetings. The president
has materialized his support through two \"AI plans\" but also through
his strong opposition to the regulation, considered too burdensome, of
text or image creation models in the European AI Act regulation. To the
point of being accused of being too vocal about the lobbying of Mistral
and his advisor Cédric O, former Secretary of State for Digital Affairs.
The French position has raised eyebrows in Brussels and in cultural
circles, who are in favor of the obligation to publish a summary of the
images and texts used to train the models (ultimately retained in the
text). The question of financing Are the French AI champions, often very
masculine, at risk of damaging their image? Their fairy tale does in any
case involve some challenges. The ecosystem remains less powerful than
in the Californian \"Cerebral Valley\", with its headquarters of OpenAI,
Google or Meta, or in London, the birthplace of DeepMind. French
start-ups will also have to find their economic model, often linked to
supporting companies. \"Our clients want to deploy AI in a robust way,
by securing their data and with a return on investment\", lists Laurent
Daudet, founder of LightOn, which has specialized since 2020 in language
processing models for professional use. In addition, the field is
coveted by consulting players such as Capgemini. Financing is also an
issue. How can they compete with Google, Meta or even OpenAI, which has
800 researchers and more than 10 billion euros in capital? If we don\'t
operate a consumer service like ChatGPT, we don\'t need billions,
explained Mr. Mensch at the AI summit in London. The CEO of Mistral
advocates \"frugality\" in capital and, like Hugging Face, smaller and
less computationally expensive AI models. With Preligens, Renaud Allioux
boasts of having built a leader in defense AI since 2016 with \"less
than 25 million euros raised\" and \"capital that has remained 100%
French\". A pledge of sovereignty addressed to the military customers of
its tools, capable of identifying, on satellite images, any vehicle, in
a Malian village or a Ukrainian airport. Are the biggest fundraisings of
Parisian AI start-ups led by American tech funds like Sequoia Capital
(sometimes accompanied by French investors, including Mr. Saadé or Mr.
Niel, present in the capital of Mistral, Poolside, Nabla or PhotoRoom).
Hugging Face says it approached French funds but they did not bet at the
beginning, then they could not invest such large amounts. A weakness on
which the Elysée and Bercy say they are mobilized. In the meantime, the
founders of Mistral say they remain majority shareholders
(\"three-quarters European\") and those of Hugging Face remain
\"decision-makers\". In August, this company also opened its capital to
Google, Amazon, AMD, Intel, IBM or Nvidia, but the latter represent most
of the players in the cloud and graphics cards, which allows its
platform to remain \"neutral\", assures Mr. Chaumond. AI start-ups are
also often forced to enter into agreements with cloud giants, both their
competitors and partners: Mistral with Google, Hugging Face with Google
and Amazon... These specialists in online services for businesses
provide young shoots with calculations and distribute their models. The
ideal, according to Mr. Chaumond, is not to enter into an "exclusive"
agreement. Like that of OpenAI with Microsoft, which has invested more
than 10 billion euros in the start-up. The European and American
competition authorities are also looking into these relationships
between giants and start-ups in AI. In November, it was with the support
of Microsoft that the founder of OpenAI, Sam Altman, was reinstated,
after being ousted by employees accusing him of betraying the spirit of
the structure created in 2015 with a non-profit goal. By coincidence,
Mr. Pérez recalls that this crisis, followed around the world, broke out
the same evening as Kyutai\'s presentation\... Could Parisian start-ups
and labs one day have this kind of governance problem? Kyutai does not
intend to deviate from its non-profit and open-source approach, assures
Mr. Pérez. While noting that the parallel with ChatGPT\'s parent company
is \"also a good omen, because OpenAI has still achieved extraordinary
things.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1766

It\'s never too early to become familiar with the concept of free
software, which can be studied, used, modified and copied, as this
children\'s story proves. A young computer whiz takes on a tech
billionaire, whose products have completely invaded the daily lives of
teenagers, parents and even governments. With a few computer hacks, the
young people will manage to turn the situation to their advantage, thus
illustrating that the stakes are much higher than just getting back to
using a scooter. Computer programs are not as neutral as we think and
mastering them is a challenge for our societies. The text was translated
from German by several German-speaking classes in France as part of an
educational project designed to show the value of so-called \"creative
commons\" licenses for the dissemination of knowledge. Finally, the
digital version of the book is free.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1767

Along with the distributor Casino and the retirement home operator
Orpea, it is the biggest French economic crash in the last five years.
The business world is watching, dumbfounded, the interminable implosion
of Atos, the European number two in IT services. Begun in June 2022, in
the hope of breathing new life into a company that was sorely lacking
it, a plan to separate the activities has only precipitated the
inexorable fall of one of the three musketeers of IT with Capgemini and
Sopra Steria, the two other major French digital services companies. If
the current negotiations are successful, the company, whose turnover
exceeded 11 billion euros in 2022 and which employs more than 100,000
people worldwide, including around 10,000 in France, will be dismantled
and wiped off the map. Outsourcing activities, the management of a
company\'s IT functions, should fall into the hands of Czech billionaire
Daniel Kretinsky, and cybersecurity and supercomputers into the hands of
European Airbus, which will leave the rest, namely digital consulting
(development of professional applications and automation), to Onepoint,
the company of entrepreneur David Layani. If the discussions fail, the 5
billion euros of gross debt accumulated by Atos augur a financial
restructuring that will probably be as painful as that of Casino, which
was ultimately sold off piecemeal. To help it in its discussions with
banks and bondholders, the IT group announced on Monday, February 5,
that it had \"requested the appointment of an ad hoc trustee (\...) with
a view to converging towards an adequate financial solution as soon as
possible\". In other words, this is the last step before financial
safeguarding. How did a group that was worth more than 11 billion euros
on the stock market in 2017 get to this point? To explain its debacle,
Atos cannot even, as Casino or Orpea did, hide behind the excuse of
external attacks, hedge funds for the supermarket chain and the book Les
Fossoyeurs (Fayard, 2022), by journalist Victor Castanet, for the French
number one in nursing homes. Nothing of the sort at Atos, which cannot
invoke the consequences of inflation or Covid-19 either: the IT sector
is among the big winners of the pandemic. The lockdowns of 2020 and 2021
forced companies around the world to digitize their operations, with
remote working, and their business, with e-commerce paving the way for a
new golden age of IT after the prosperous decades of the 1980s and
1990s. According to research firm Gartner, global spending on IT
services will exceed \$1.5 trillion (€1.385 trillion) in 2024, 48% more
than in 2019. Moreover, when Atos is sinking, Capgemini, its main
competitor, is shining, with a market capitalization of €35 billion. Its
2023 results, which will be published on February 14, should be the best
in the group\'s history, driven, precisely, by the explosion in IT
investments. Chronic instability Just a few years ago, the two French
champions were not so far apart. In 2015, only 800 million euros in
turnover separated Capgemini and Atos. With around 10 billion euros in
annual sales, they both rank in the world\'s top 10 IT services
companies, alongside the Americans IBM, HP and Accenture, and the
Indians TCS and Infosys. But what Atos does not see is that, blinded by
a race for size, the group will miss all the turns in its business, with
little help from chronic management instability and a failing board of
directors. Six CEOs succeeded one another between November 2019 and
January 2024. When he took over Atos in 2008, Thierry Breton, now
European Commissioner for the Internal Market, inherited a second
division group, still very focused on France and not very much in line
with his ambitions. The bubbling former CEO of France Télécom is
convinced that only a critical size will allow it to meet the needs of
multinationals. He quickly launches the company to attack Europe. In
2010, the first coup: Atos buys Siemens IT Solutions and Services, the
IT division of the German industrial conglomerate. Suddenly, the small
IT services company goes from 5 to 8.7 billion euros in turnover.
\"It\'s one of the most important Franco-German cooperations since EADS
\[which became Airbus\]\", boasts Mr. Breton, not a little proud to make
his group the leading European player, ahead of its rival Capgemini, in
outsourcing, a service that consists of taking charge of the management
of all or part of a company\'s IT. With Siemens, half of Atos\' revenues
come from this business, which is crucial for an IT services company,
according to the CEO. This is the first strategic error. While Atos is
growing in the management of its clients\' data centers - it manages
more than 3 million servers - the group does not see the rise of
so-called \"public\" cloud computing, deployed by the Americans Google,
Amazon or Microsoft. Rather than having its own servers, managed by a
service provider like Atos, a company has every interest in renting
capacity from a shared cloud provider, based on needs that it can
adjust. Insufficiently profitable \"The public cloud broke the market,
and Atos found itself managing obsolete machines\", summarizes
Jean-François Perret, from the consulting firm Pierre Audoin
Consultants. Other big names in IT have suffered from this shift. The
giant IBM got rid of these activities that had become too cumbersome, by
housing them in an independent entity, Kyndryl, listed on the stock
exchange in November 2021. For the same reason, HP had sold these
services to CSC, which became DXC Technology, in 2016. Second mistake:
focused during those years on the development of outsourcing, even if
the acquisition, in 2014, of the French Bull opened the doors to
cybersecurity and supercomputers, two growing activities, Atos did not
take a strong enough turn towards outsourcing, that is to say the
transfer of part of the workforce to low-cost countries, mainly India,
rich in millions of young engineers. It was not until the acquisition in
2018 of the American Syntel, which has 18,000 employees in India, that
the group headed by Mr. Breton fully understood the phenomenon, a major
transformation of the IT industry. But it was too late. When Atos passed
the 25,000 Indian engineers mark in 2020, Capgemini already employed
nearly 150,000 people in the subcontinent, five times more than ten
years previously. And this figure has increased further: at the end of
2022, Capgemini employed 360,000 people worldwide, half of whom were in
India, and only 38,000 in France. For a digital services company, whose
salaries represent almost all of the costs, the proportion of
outsourcing is crucial. \"The cost per head ranges from 1 to 6 between
offshore and onshore staff,\" estimate analysts at AlphaValue. The
difference is reflected in the figures: in 2022, Atos generated an
operating margin of 3.1%; that of Capgemini reached 13%; the American
Accenture, the world number one, was close to 16%. In 2015, the
profitability gap between the two largest French digital services
companies was only 3 points. \"Headwinds\" Although insufficiently
profitable in the years that followed, Atos persisted. In January 2021,
the group, led by Elie Girard since Mr. Breton left for Brussels at the
end of 2019, was ready to pay 10 billion dollars to acquire\... the
American DXC, whose businesses resembled its own. Total incomprehension.
Atos\' stock price collapsed by more than 15% in a few days. Why not
move towards other market segments instead to dilute the weight of
outsourcing? This is what Capgemini did in 2020, by betting 5 billion
euros for the acquisition of the French Altran, a bet on the marriage of
IT and engineering. The same logic prevailed for the marriage, in 2014,
between Sopra, the third French digital services company, and Steria.
"Some thought that Altran was too far from our bases. But this
acquisition allowed us to support the movement of convergence between
the digital and physical spaces of customers. The development of an
automobile, an airplane or a factory now requires marrying engineering
and IT," explains Aiman Ezzat, CEO of Capgemini. As a result, while
\"seven or eight years ago, we spent 90% of our time with the company\'s
IT director, today, half of our activity is done with the heads of
research and development or general management.\" Rather than reflecting
the difficulties of a sector, Atos\'s decline is the result of a series
of bad choices at a time when technological changes required a new
model. A useful warning at a time when generative artificial
intelligence (AI), which can, for example, automate the coding of
websites or software, promises to shake up the rules. \"AI will enable
the development of new services. But will customers be prepared to pay
for them? And if engineers become more productive, will these
productivity gains be kept by digital services companies or passed on to
customers via price reductions?\" asks Mr. Perret. Analysts are still
struggling to answer these questions, as the revenues derived from AI by
digital services companies remain modest. Accenture has recorded \$300
million in orders in 2023 in generative AI, mainly in consulting, but
this represents only 0.4% of its annual orders. "Will AI be
deflationary? In the past, this has been said about the cloud, open
source software and on-demand computing, but the facts have shown that
each technological advance only increases the demand for IT services.
When production capacities are freed up, they are reallocated to other
digital investments," argues Mr. Ezzat. "We expect that the sector as a
whole will succeed in pivoting and maintaining its relevance," argue for
their part the analysts of Morgan Stanley in a long study, published in
June 2023, on the consequences of AI for IT services. But they warn:
"Some segments are relatively more likely to face headwinds related to
the size of their market, and to be more significantly disrupted by
AI-powered automation." They identify two fragile areas: managed
services and business applications. Unfortunately, these are two of
Atos's major specialties.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1768

Davos (Switzerland) - special correspondent - He\'s the one everyone was
waiting for. When he spoke, CEOs took out their phones to film the
event. Words rush when Sam Altman speaks, as if they were in a hurry to
get out of this boiling brain. The gaze is lost, eyes fixed on his
thoughts. The CEO of Open AI, creator of ChatGPT, was the messiah of
this World Economic Forum in Davos (Switzerland). He embodies the new
revolution, the one that will change the game and that companies have
been waiting for a long time, artificial intelligence (AI). Everyone
wants AI. \"It is essential to design our new molecules and accelerate
our tests,\" assures Albert Bourla, CEO of the pharmaceutical giant
Pfizer. \"No excuses, all industries will be affected,\" adds Julie
Sweet, CEO of Accenture, the world\'s leading consulting firm. Even
activists at Transparency International, the anti-corruption
association, are using AI to identify illicit financial circuits in
Mexico. Why all the hype? The answer can be summed up in one word:
productivity. "We estimate that AI should generate \$4 trillion \[around
€3.7 trillion\] in productivity gains by 2030," says Arvind Krishna, CEO
of IBM. This promise of designing a molecule or producing a car in half
the time has manufacturers buzzing. "I don't know a single CAC 40
company that isn't deploying artificial intelligence," says Alexis
Combessie, founder of the start-up Giskard (an allusion to a robot from
Isaac Asimov's novels and not to a former president...), which offers
testing and verification tools in this area. As he explains, AI
solutions have existed for about ten years, to answer questions asked on
Google or translate a text. What has changed is the training -- the P of
GPT (Generative Pre-trained Transformer). Previous software started from
scratch and trained with use, like a search engine. Current ones are
trained with billions of data before being used. Hence their ability to
generate texts and images, the fruit of their prior education. This
necessary learning requires days and weeks of intensive calculations in
ultra-powerful data centers. Hence the cost and difficulty of producing
these "foundation models" that form the heart of the systems. Experts at
BlackRock, the world's leading investment company, estimate that the
eight major global cloud players, these data centers scattered around
the world, should invest a cumulative amount of \$160 billion in 2024
alone to increase their capacity to meet this new demand. Open AI is far
from alone in this announced revolution. Hundreds of thousands of models
are circulating in the free software community. The Franco-American
company Hugging Face lists them and makes them available on its
platform. Basic building blocks that allow the bold to try their luck.
The French community is rather well placed in this race. Created less
than a year ago, the company Mistral, rival of OpenAI, has already
carved out a global reputation for itself that was noticeable in Davos.
It is the first name that comes up to evoke competition for Sam
Altman\'s company. Impact on employment Arriving with an armada of
around twenty start-ups, Emmanuel Macron had a good game, on Wednesday,
January 17, to highlight them. \"There are three families in artificial
intelligence,\" explains Gabriel Hubert, founder of the company Dust.
The one that works on predictive, for example to calculate the
probability of an event occurring; the one that is interested in
classification, such as facial recognition; and the one that generates
content, text, image, code, etc. » This last family, the newest, is in
the spotlight. Dust is one of them. Arriving in Davos in the
president\'s luggage, the company, created in February 2023 and which
employs only ten people, attracts attention. Roelof Botha, one of the
partners of Sequoia, the world\'s venture capital pope, does not fail to
mention Dust in his round table. He is the main shareholder. \"Ten years
ago, when we set up our first company,\" recalls Mr. Hubert, \"we
quickly asked ourselves the question of leaving for the United States to
grow. This is no longer the case. The political and financial
environment is much more favorable.\" With Mistral for the model, Dust
for deployment in companies and Giskard for testing and security, France
has an undeniable asset with young but already very experienced
entrepreneurs. Created in 2021, Giskard (25 employees) works for
companies such as Axa and L\'Oréal. Because if the first question that
manufacturers ask these young people who are good at maths is \"what use
can this be to me?\", the second is that of the risks: misappropriation
by a malicious actor or a bug with unpredictable consequences. Hence the
debate on regulation. \"We need a framework,\" acknowledges Satya
Nadella, CEO of Microsoft and shareholder of Open AI. There remains a
risk that for the moment concerns less the bosses than their employees,
that of being left behind. What will the impact be on employment? What
will the job of the future be? \"People will have better tools at their
disposal, and they are interested in other humans,\" replies Sam Altman.
I am not a great AI researcher. My job is to think about what needs to
be done and to work with others to make it happen. Everyone\'s job will
look a little more like that. \" An optimistic look that should not hide
the fact that the most powerful AI will never be able to predict what
humans will do with it. The pessimists already have an answer.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1769

Making a living selling poison is not an easy thing. It can even become
perilous when activists, associations, and even judges of all stripes
get involved in your little lucrative business, because there are still
some unfortunate qualifications in the law that can sometimes complicate
your task. Friends who produce dangerous pesticides, toxic chemicals,
useless and harmful drugs, eternal pollutants, obesogenic foods,
carcinogenic additives and sweeteners, do not tremble any longer: years
of expertise have allowed us to develop a range of simple speeches and
actions with proven effectiveness. In order to democratize access to
these recipes usually sold for their weight in gold by communication
agencies, here they are in \"open source\". It is then up to you to
adapt them to the poison that concerns you and to have them carried by
experts in the high-audience media arenas and the circles that will
legislate on the maintenance of your products on the market. Advocate
complexity Can you imagine a situation, an object, a concept that could
not be said to be complex? Complexity has the advantage of placing a
threshold distinguishing simple things from complex things. The good
news is that we do not know how to measure complexity and that there is
no consensus on the value of the threshold. You can therefore safely
affirm that the situation you are accused of is complex, and that not
recognizing it is being simplistic, even Manichean. It may not seem like
much, but it is an excellent way to sow doubt in the minds of your
opponents, which brings us to the second argument. Sow doubt What can we
be absolutely certain of? Popularized by the Trump presidency,
post-truth opens up fantastic perspectives for defending your
activities. Of course, science develops knowledge. But it also claims
the limits and imperfections of its knowledge, and even, hold on to your
hats, that they will one day be exceeded. Argue that definitive proof
demonstrating the danger of your product has not been obtained. More
research is needed. Scientists are always concerned with causality and
proof and you will sow doubt in their ranks. Be relativistic, evoke
without reserve the equivocal, the controversial, the debated. Science
becomes an opinion like any other, the epidemiological and toxicological
studies proving the harmfulness of your juicy business will be only one
assertion among others just as well-founded. And here comes the third
argument. Underline the hidden intentionality If there are no more facts
but opinions, then underline in broad strokes the political intentions
of your adversaries. Do not hesitate to accuse them of being moralistic:
by a wonderful reversal of values, it is an infallible way to discredit
the troublemakers. They justify their attacks with science, you will
emphasize that they act as activists, as liberticidal ideologues, or
even as terrorists if you are in an outrageous mood. It always has its
little effect. The debate will be opportunely shifted: it will no longer
be a question of proof but of conviction, and it will be easy for you to
saturate the media space to prevail on this ground. To do this, you will
advantageously mobilize the fourth and fifth arguments. Explain the
purposeOf course, the real purpose of your activity, your enrichment,
will not justify much in the eyes of your detractors. You will however
be skillful enough to present another purpose: to fight against world
hunger (if you sell pesticides or cheap unhealthy foods), to fight
against a health scourge (if you sell \"light\" food or food additives),
to connect the peoples of the world (if you sell private jets), etc.
Beyond these specific purposes, never disdain the sledgehammer argument
that elected officials are always sensitive to: we must safeguard the
jobs of those who produce your poisons in order to support the growth of
the territory whose votes they received. And there you have it, a
patriot concerned about the social issue! Plead individual
responsibilityAt the same time as you invent indisputable purposes that
will make you seem like a good soul, you will remind people that the
problem is not the poison, but the way it is consumed. If you sell junk
food, promote physical activity and vegetables, and blame consumers who
have not followed your recommendations. If you sell pesticides or toxic
chemicals, you will insist on the culpable failure to wear personal
protective equipment. In the same vein, promote resilience: why
wouldn\'t the victims of your poisons seize this opportunity that you
are offering them to bounce back? You will be surprised at the ease with
which this reversal of the causal relationship will be accepted,
encouraged and even financed by the public authorities. Let this not
prevent you from transforming the test by affirming at every turn your
attachment to individual responsibility, you will soon be inducted as a
defender of freedom. And you will have to make this commitment known,
this is where the sixth point becomes essential. Resort to patronage Do
not hesitate to finance research on your own poisons. Create specialized
associations and ad hoc committees where you will recruit pell-mell,
industrialists, government representatives and scientists who will
establish priorities on the subjects to be studied, increase the number
of meetings and colloquiums, and guide research programs. Rather than
tedious toxicological studies, propose to explore the trail of the
genetic susceptibility of exposed individuals. Publish in peer-reviewed
journals, have renowned authors sign scientific articles that you have
written and publish elegant booklets on your social usefulness. Raise
awareness among children, support local communities, while remaining
discreet for even greater effectiveness. Never be defensive, but open,
sincere and ready for dialogue. Be the cunning champion of transparency.
Until it is necessary to use the seventh weapon. Use intimidationMake
yourself feared. Surround yourself with a swarm of lawyers who will
threaten to sue anyone who prevents them from poisoning in circles with
defamation complaints. Let it be clear: no lightning rod of scientific
data will protect them from legal wrath. And since the balance of
economic power is in your favor, use it in court to demand heavy
financial penalties. Also wave a slew of trolls to saturate social
networks. Have no qualms about tarnishing the scientific reputation of
your opponents. Aim low, slander in all directions. Denounce the media
court Let\'s prepare for the worst: if your activity is particularly
harmful, it is possible that the first seven points are insufficient.
Don\'t panic, however, we have a solution even for these extreme cases!
Summon the presumption of innocence, denounce the media court, the
pharmacies (yes yes!), let the fire die down in the slowness of the
courts by promising that you will actively contribute to the
investigation to put an end to unbearable insinuations. You will be able
to count on the statute of limitations, the absence of proof of your
intentionality or your knowledge of the toxic effects of your poisons.
Even if you are convicted, appeal procedures, when they are suspensive,
will allow you to gain precious years. And if the judgment turns out to
be final, you will clear your name by claiming that we cannot evaluate
with current criteria what has been done in the past, and will then
reuse the previous arguments over and over again. Here is the toolbox
that we offer you. Simple and complementary weapons that you will easily
adapt to the poison that you want to continue to sell. Poison must
appear for what it is, a commodity like any other with its production,
distribution and marketing circuits. There is nothing dishonourable in
doing business and protecting one\'s interests above all. In the kingdom
of free trade, poison is a sure value, public health, a
counterproductive utopia.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1770

Having French and European artificial intelligence (AI) models is \"a
technological sovereignty issue\", affirmed Emmanuel Macron in
mid-November 2023, on the occasion of the creation of Kyutai, an AI
research laboratory launched by Xavier Niel, founder of the telecoms
group Iliad (and personal shareholder of Le Monde), Rodolphe Saadé, CEO
of the shipping company CMA CGM, and Eric Schmidt, the former CEO of
Google. The goal is to help create software capable of generating text,
audio and video content comparable to that of Google, Meta or OpenAI,
the creator of ChatGPT. This is also the mission of French start-ups
such as LightOn, Hugging Face or Mistral AI. The French executive
considers it important not to leave a few American giants the monopoly
on a fairly general-use technology, as was the case for social networks,
search engines or mobile ecosystems. France is far from being the only
one to think that AI is becoming a sovereignty issue. Germany is
promoting its start-up Aleph Alpha. The United Arab Emirates has
launched AI71 and India Krutrim and Sarvam AI, also intended to bring
out local AI models, notes The Economist. The liberal British weekly
even detects an \"era of AI nationalism\", in which \"sovereign states
are embarking on a race to control their digital destiny\". This desire,
however, leaves some challenges emerging. That language models \"are not
only fed by content in English\" is a \"civilizational challenge\",
declared Mr. Macron. Cédric O, lobbyist for Mistral AI and former
Secretary of State, repeats that a conversational robot will attribute,
depending on its country of origin, the invention of the airplane to the
Frenchman Clément Ader, the American brothers Orville and Wilbur Wright
or the Brazilian Alberto Santos-Dumont. The State has promised to make
French-language texts and images available from public entities such as
the National Library of France or the National Audiovisual Institute. In
India or Africa, the challenge of multilingualism and languages and
dialects that are underrepresented online is immense. American giants,
for their part, want to be at the forefront of AI translation, with
models that manage dozens or hundreds of languages. Race for
supercomputers In addition, governments in Paris or Brussels want to
make public computing capacities available to their start-ups and
encourage supercomputers such as that of Scaleway (a subsidiary of
Iliad), even if their power does not reach that of cloud leaders Google,
Amazon or Microsoft (OpenAI partner). Having locally developed models --
and possibly modifiable, such as the open source software of Mistral AI,
LightOn or Kyutai -- interests some companies, keen to avoid depending
on the opaque software of an American giant. Will states want to go
further and impose purchasing rules on public entities, as France is
trying to do in the field of services and data hosted in the cloud? Some
still hope to favor European tech in public calls for tenders, with the
vote on a \"Buy European Act\". Another challenge: financing AI
start-ups. Mistral AI is controlled by its founders, but the first
investors in its funding rounds are American funds. The French defense
start-up Preligens boasts 100% French capital. Tomorrow, AI, seen as a
sensitive technology, could be subject to export restrictions:
Washington has already banned Chinese players from using the best
computer chips allocated to AI and decreed in November 2023 the
obligation for players in the sector to declare their most powerful
models and their transactions with foreign buyers. Finally, the
temptation of regulatory dumping between nations is emerging. London
does not want to regulate when Paris or Berlin oppose provisions of the
European AI Act regulation, which they consider too restrictive.
\"Regulation is not the enemy of innovation,\" retorted Margrethe
Vestager, the European Commissioner for Competition.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1771

RESEARCH The French artificial intelligence ecosystem is enriched by a
new research center. Launched by Artefact, a service company
specializing in the deployment of these technologies, and with the
support of companies such as Société Générale, Orange and Decathlon,
this new structure, already operational, will bring together a team of
30 researchers by 2025. They will collaborate with professors from
around ten institutions such as the École Polytechnique,
CentraleSupélec, Sorbonne Université, the CNRS, the Université
Paris-Saclay and the ESCP Business School. Unlike the Kyutai laboratory,
launched last November and co-financed by Xavier Niel, Rodolphe Saadé
and the former head of Google Eric Schmidt, or Fair, the fundamental
research laboratory of Meta, this new initiative, with more modest
financial resources, stands out above all by its desire to respond to
\"business\" issues. \"We want to build bridges between the expertise of
professors from major universities, who need concrete data sets to
advance their research, and the concrete needs of large international
companies on certain AI issues,\" summarizes Vincent Luciani, CEO and
co-founder of Artefact. For Société Générale, for example - and the
financial world in general - an important subject in AI is both to
optimize models in order to better detect fraudulent profiles, but also
to improve their transparency and explainability, to be able to report
them to the competent authorities. In gestation for a year and a half,
this project therefore began - in addition to the first recruitments -
with work to identify the \"right\" research subjects, responding to the
needs of companies, the interests of researchers and the academic needs
to explore little-known areas. \"Professors see a strong interest in
working on complex industrial issues, based on real data sets that they
often sorely lack, and the prospects of publications as a result,\"
explains Emmanuel Malherbe, machine learning researcher and director of
this new center. The results of these collaborations will be open
source, whether it is the publication of computer code, scientific
articles or conferences. For companies that accept this open source
principle, the financial commitment is minimal compared to the
possibility of accessing the expertise of recognized researchers and
moving forward with their adoption of AI. For Artefact, which does not
claim any intellectual property on the results, the interest is both to
be upstream on everything that comes out of the center and to hope to
attract some of the best talents. In discussion with MIT This center is
intended to be self-financing. In addition to the investment by Artefact
and its industrial partners, the structure relies on the system of
industrial agreements for training through research (Cifre) which allows
a company to benefit from public funding to recruit a young doctoral
student whose work will lead to the defense of a thesis. The Artefact
research center has also positioned itself on a call for tenders from
Bpifrance as part of France 2030, by setting up a consortium with
Mistral AI (the former Minister of Digital Affairs, Cédric O, is on the
supervisory board of Artefact and non-executive co-founder of Mistral
AI), to adapt the large general language models developed by the very
young French nugget to business verticals. Artefact hopes to extend the
collaborations of this center internationally. The company is in
discussions with MIT and universities in the United States, the United
Kingdom and China. IV The French artificial intelligence ecosystem is
enriched by a new research center. Launched by Artefact, a service
company specializing in the deployment of these technologies, and with
the support of companies such as Société Générale, Orange and Decathlon,
this new structure, already operational, will bring together a team of
30 researchers by 2025. They will collaborate with professors from
around ten institutions such as the École Polytechnique,
CentraleSupélec, Sorbonne Université, the CNRS, the Université
Paris-Saclay and the ESCP Business School. Unlike the Kyutai laboratory,
launched last November and co-financed by Xavier Niel, Rodolphe Saadé
and the former head of Google Eric Schmidt, or Fair, the fundamental
research laboratory of Meta, this new initiative, with more modest
financial resources, stands out above all by its desire to respond to
\"business\" issues. \"We want to build bridges between the expertise of
professors from major universities, who need concrete data sets to
advance their research, and the concrete needs of large international
companies on certain AI issues,\" summarizes Vincent Luciani, CEO and
co-founder of Artefact. For Société Générale, for example - and the
financial world in general - an important subject in AI is both to
optimize models in order to better detect fraudulent profiles, but also
to improve their transparency and explainability, to be able to report
them to the competent authorities. In gestation for a year and a half,
this project therefore began - in addition to the first recruitments -
with work to identify the \"right\" research subjects, responding to the
needs of companies, the interests of researchers and the academic needs
to explore little-known areas. \"Professors see a strong interest in
working on complex industrial issues, based on real data sets that they
often sorely lack, and the prospects of publications as a result,\"
explains Emmanuel Malherbe, machine learning researcher and director of
this new center. The results of these collaborations will be open
source, whether it is the publication of computer code, scientific
articles or conferences. For companies that accept this open source
principle, the financial commitment is minimal compared to the
possibility of accessing the expertise of recognized researchers and
moving forward with their adoption of AI. For Artefact, which does not
claim any intellectual property on the results, the interest is both to
be upstream on everything that comes out of the center and to hope to
attract some of the best talents. This center is intended to be
self-financing. In addition to the investment by Artefact and its
industrial partners, the structure relies on the system of industrial
agreements for training through research (Cifre) which allows a company
to benefit from public funding to recruit a young doctoral student whose
work will lead to the defense of a thesis. The Artefact research center
has also positioned itself on a call for tenders from Bpifrance as part
of France 2030, by setting up a consortium with Mistral AI (the former
Minister of Digital Affairs, Cédric O, is on the supervisory board of
Artefact and non-executive co-founder of Mistral AI), to adapt the large
general language models developed by the very young French nugget to
business verticals. Artefact hopes to extend the collaborations of this
center internationally. The company is in discussions with MIT and
universities in the United States, the United Kingdom and China.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1772

The year 2023 was the year of generative artificial intelligence (AI),
driven in particular by OpenAI\'s ChatGPT conversational agent. Under
its \"hood\" is a large language model (or LLM) called \"GPT-4\", an AI
trained on prodigious quantities of raw texts to find a plausible ending
to the beginning of a sentence. It is this capacity that ChatGPT
exploits to write, summarize or translate articles or CVs, or even
produce computer code, and LLMs are the nerve center of the war that the
international champions of generative AI are engaged in today. Thus, LLM
announcements have followed one after the other by the American giants
Meta, Google, Apple, soon followed by Amazon, or their Chinese
competitor Baidu, recently joined in the race by emerging European
players such as the German Aleph Alpha or the French LightOn and Mistral
AI. What are the challenges of this race for innovation and what does
2024 have in store for us? On a technical level, 2023 saw the arrival of
LLMs that are fast and compact enough to run on a mobile phone, and the
integration of new modalities: the synthesis of realistic images is now
being replaced by the analysis of images, sound and human speech by
GPT-4v and Gemini, for example. However, efforts to reduce the cost of
training LLMs and their energy impact must continue: the millions of
hours of calculation on specialized processors (GPUs) required to train
a single LLM on billions of documents cost tens of millions of euros.
Emerging players such as Mistral AI and the \"newcomer\" Kyutai do not
hide the fact that a significant portion of their spectacular
fundraising is intended for calculation. Kingmaker This raises the
question of the economic model of generative AI: there are currently
only a handful of players (a dozen at most) capable of creating
\"generic\" LLMs by training them on gigantic corpora. But this is what
makes them successful: directly training small specialized models does
not provide the same performance. How will the value be shared between
these players, whether or not they are for-profit? What future for the
myriad of companies called upon to develop to adapt generic LLMs to the
domains and data of specific companies (we are talking about fine
tuning)? The same question for the GPU manufacturer Nvidia, whose
quasi-monopoly on their production, and therefore control over their
access, could give it a kingmaker role. The use of pre-trained LLMs by a
handful of suppliers also raises the question of their reliability,
particularly for critical applications, even after fine tuning. The
arrival on the market of \"open models\" such as LLaMA-2 or Mistral AI
is a possible solution, although the classic definitions of free
software do not apply directly to LLMs, since it is not only the source
code that determines their behavior, but also the billions of parameters
learned on often \"proprietary\" data. More generally, the issue of data
collection and use remains a hot topic, as shown by the very recent
lawsuit filed by the New York Times against OpenAI and Microsoft for
copyright infringement. Finally, the AI Act that has just been adopted
by the European Union will impose rules of precaution, certification and
transparency in the uses of AI (and in particular generative AI). Its
implementation will have to be specified in the standards currently
being negotiated, so the battle is far from over. The year 2024 promises
to be exciting.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1773

The Mac is 40 years old. However, January 24, 1984 did not have the same
earthquake effect on the computer world as the iPhone, also unveiled by
Steve Jobs, 23 years later, on January 9, 2007. But Apple had still
dropped a bombshell. \"We are betting on our vision and we prefer to do
that rather than imitate other products on the market,\" said Jobs,
Apple\'s big boss, at the time. \"Let other companies do that.\" This
statement did not fall on deaf ears. Not quite two years later, in
November 1985, Microsoft, led by Bill Gates to whom Jobs had presented
the Mac in the year before it was launched, launched the first version
of the Windows operating system. Windows, as its name suggests,
presented software on the PC screen as windows that were stacked on top
of each other. It was a graphics layer added to MS-DOS, the computer
system that launched Microsoft, and it relied solely on text typed on
the keyboard. Windows needed a mouse to run. The computer industry owes
all of this to the Mac first. The Macintosh emerged as a disruptive
force with its own graphical interface and mouse. Apple made the
personal computer more accessible and intuitive. In theory, at least.
The first Macintosh was not particularly affordable. Its interface
suffered from many limitations. Its software was sparse and buggy. Its
monitor was tiny and monochrome. But it was a single, all-in-one device
that could be quickly installed on a desktop. Even if it was a bit
clumsily, the Mac already embodied Apple\'s oft-repeated maxim: \"It
just works.\" This rivalry and emulation between Apple and Microsoft
fueled decades of innovation, shaping the PC market as we know it today.
It benefited both. Especially the other, in fact, so much so that in
1997, as Apple was flirting with bankruptcy, Microsoft decided to invest
\$150 million in its Cupertino rival. This effectively ended a legal
battle that could have ended badly for Bill Gates\' empire. Unsung
heroes The Mac, then, was a leap forward that pushed the entire
industry, including Microsoft, to adopt and develop graphical interfaces
and to adopt the mouse as an essential computing peripheral. In all
this, History remembers the pivotal role of Steve Jobs, co-founder and
then CEO of Apple. In fact, his main contribution was to insist on the
use of a mouse, and, again, a mouse with only one button. The Macintosh
was the work of engineers led by Jef Raskin, who developed the Mac OS
software, and Steve Wozniak, aka Woz, who designed Apple\'s first
personal computers. As for the two sides of the same coin, it is often
said that Woz was the innovator while Jobs was the marketer. The Mac
mouse, for its part, was the simplest version of a human-machine
interface that had been puzzling computer scientists at Stanford
University in California since the 1960s. Someone other than Steve
Jobs---say, the real inventor of the mouse, engineer Douglas
Engelbart---might have opted for a five-button mouse, one for each
finger, with organ-style foot extensions. But not Jobs. He probably
believed that a stripped-down device would appeal to a wider audience.
History has proven him right. Even today, this stubbornness in imposing
a single, simple way for customers to interact with its devices is what
sets Apple apart from its rivals. It's also what most infuriates its
critics. Think Different The other key to the Mac's success is
marketing. The commercial that aired during Super Bowl XVIII and
introduced the Macintosh to millions of American consumers is now a
staple of any good Marketing 101 class. Directed by Sir Ridley Scott,
the video, titled 1984, is based on George Orwell's novel of the same
name. It features a dystopian world where a big brother (IBM, disguised
as Big Brother) dominates society. The heroine, wielding a hammer, runs
towards a giant screen and smashes it, symbolizing Apple\'s mission to
save humanity from future domination by monotonous and oppressive
technology. At a time when computer advertising was monotonous and
riddled with technical terms, 1984 broke the mold. The Macintosh was
launched. Apple was able to ride the wave of its Mac\'s popularity for
over a decade, but it almost did not survive the departure of Jobs in
1985. In fact, it took Steve Jobs\' return to Apple in 1997 to see the
Mac reborn. A year later, Apple introduced the iMac, which revitalized
the brand with a different all-in-one design and, most importantly,
bright colors. \"It just works\" became \"Think different,\" syntax
error included. New success for Jobs, who had established himself as an
uncompromising and detail-oriented leader to the point of obsession, a
reputation reinforced three years later with the launch of the iPod, the
musical ancestor of the iPhone and the emergence of mobility. The iPhone
would later convince Google to buy a small open-source mobile system
called Android to create its own mobile platform. The iPod, a digital
music player with a 2-inch diagonal monochrome screen and whose main
quality was that it could hold the equivalent of 1,000 MP3 music files,
was a huge success mainly thanks to a recipe similar to that of the
first Mac: its touch-sensitive scroll wheel added an innovative
interface to a type of device that already existed, but which was a
little more complicated than what the general public was looking for.
Back then, carrying around 1,000 songs in your pocket was a revolution.
A digital revolution, it should be noted, the first of many. A series,
in fact, that we don't know how it would have happened if the Mac hadn't
been born 40 years ago. The Macintosh emerged as a disruptive force with
its own graphical interface and mouse. Apple made the personal computer
more accessible and intuitive. In theory, at least. The first Macintosh
wasn't particularly affordable. Its interface suffered from many
limitations. Its software was sparse and buggy. Its monitor was tiny and
monochrome. But it was a single, all-in-one device that could be quickly
installed on a desk.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1774

London - Special Envoy - When Etienne Riot, the director of applied
research and innovation at the architecture agency PCA-Stream, asked
Midjourney to replace the glass façade of the Le Monde building in Paris
with a brick cladding, the artificial intelligence (AI) "hallucinated".
With each new iteration, it spat out a different shape: conical,
trapezoidal, twisted... Everything except the parabolic volume stretched
like chewing gum that the Norwegians at Snohetta (in association with
the French agency SRA) designed for the French press group. "It didn't
understand the geometry," the engineer deduced. The exercise he proposed
aimed to illustrate the capabilities and limits of machine learning
models, image generators applied to architecture. Etienne Riot also
asked Midjourney to place balconies on the building. \"We expected him
to put them on the ground or in the sky\... He doesn\'t know how to
place architectural elements, he wasn\'t trained for it. But we hadn\'t
imagined that he wouldn\'t be able to integrate a single one into the
image. If he failed, it\'s because he didn\'t identify the building as a
building.\" \"A kid who is a genius\" Generative artificial intelligence
produces photos, novels. It has led Hollywood actors and screenwriters
to go on strike to secure their jobs. But it cannot design a building.
From the two-dimensional representation to the physical object
integrated into its context, compliant with the inextricable tangle of
standards that govern the construction sector as much as with the rules
of urban planning, respecting the well-being of users as much as the
client\'s budget, there is a gulf that would require at least designing
an ad hoc model to fill it. The investments required by such a project,
at least as colossal as those that allowed the creation of ChatGPT,
Midjourney or Dall-E, would be impossible to amortize on the
architecture sector alone. If such a model ever ended up existing, it
would still lack the sensitivity -- to space, to light, to the spirit of
places... -- without which architecture is nothing more than a sad
assembly of low-quality materials. However, architects are not the last
to have thrown themselves at these image generators that have been
driving the Internet crazy for a little over a year. If Midjourney does
not recognize the building of Le Monde, it knows how to cross a Hindu
temple with a Norman cottage, produce images of a villa \"in the style
of Frank Lloyd Wright\", integrate the Sydney Opera House (Jorn Utzon,
1973) into a decor illustrated in pencil\... However crude, approximate
or fanciful they may be, these blends have the charm of the unexpected,
which is no small thing in a profession whose imagination is more locked
up than ever. \"These monstrosities that we have fun creating can free
us up in relation to the history of architecture, in relation to the
ugly, in relation to our own reflexes\", enthuses Umberto Napolitano,
co-founder of LAN, an agency known for having developed an aesthetic
based on the plot and repetition. He sees AI as a way to \"get away from
the legacy of the modern\", \"a force of proposition that reconnects
with a dreamlike quality that we had somewhat forgotten, which has the
particularity of not knowing the history\". Playing with Midjourney, he
says, \"is like talking to a kid who is a genius\". These AIs do nothing
other than draw on databases of billions of images produced before 2021,
but they are trained by American and Chinese computer scientists whose
vision of the world radically biases the content produced. After several
months spent on Midjourney, whose style he describes as \"slightly
retro\", \"evocative of film\", Olivier Campagne, an architect
specializing in the production of 3D perspectives, switched to Stable
Diffusion. Its aesthetic is more contemporary, it produces less
surprising images, but this tool developed and managed in open source
offers more freedom to users. It allows you to train your own models,
called LoRA (for Low-Rank Adaptation), by injecting your own images.
Olivier Campagne has created several of them. One of these models
generates images \"in the style of Rory Gardiner\". He made it work by
indexing several hundred photos provided to him by this architectural
photographer. Another feeds on the photos he took himself on the Saclay
plateau, with a view to creating landscapes with a desolate atmosphere,
\"almost apocalyptic\". Alternatives to the dominant aesthetic of the
platform, these small models contribute to its cultural enrichment.
\"Every time I ask for a tiled roof, the tiles are gray. I imagine that
the photos they come from were all taken in China. We could really do
with LoRA representing French architecture! And architecture from all
regions of the world\...\" Creative destruction These gaping flaws do
not prevent artificial intelligence from infiltrating architectural
agencies. In France, the PCA-Stream agency is a pioneer in this field.
For the past year and a half, it has launched a series of seminars on
the subject, and converted all of its businesses to technology.
Midjourney and Stable Diffusion are used to create moodboards, visual
supports intended to generate ideas upstream of the creation process, to
exchange with clients or future users. \"You want a Haussmannian
building or new offices, Stable Diffusion knows roughly what it looks
like. It makes suggestions, explains Etienne Riot. It gives absurd
things, like stools on tables\... And sometimes, ideas.\" ChatGPT has
also become commonplace. To correct spelling mistakes in particular -
the writing is still done by humans, the tool\'s capabilities in this
area still leaving something to be desired for long texts, we are told.
But it is in the technology department that the tool works wonders,
where all sorts of applications are produced to help with programming,
representation, etc. \"With ChatGPT, I feel like I have a whole team of
coders with me!\" marvels Adrien Pointeau, the head of the department.
Artificial intelligence is not limited to these generative models of
text or images. The machine learning technology that is its foundation,
and allows machines to learn from data without having been explicitly
programmed to do so, finds countless applications in the architecture.
It allows you to instantly accomplish tasks that would have taken
several days or even weeks just a few months ago: integrating the rules
of the bioclimatic local urban planning plan (PLU) into an architectural
project, establishing a building\'s surface area table, automating the
production of elements such as stairs, \"without much added value\" but
whose production is made very complex by the number of standards and
constraints they include\... Creative destruction is underway. In other
words, according to Etienne Riot: \"What is said in the field is that we
are not afraid of being replaced by AI, but by someone who masters AI!\"
Its field of application seems limitless. While the wind of ecological
protest blowing through the grandes écoles appears to be a major issue
for the new \"iconic building\" project on the HEC campus that he is
thinking about, Philippe Chiambaretta, the founder of the PCA-Stream
agency, wonders if AI could not help him think. \"By integrating
information from students, messages they post on social networks, for
example, with data from the bioclimatic PLU, architectural references,
and other data, we could perhaps arrive at specifications\...\" AI\'s
synthesis capabilities are proving particularly strategic in the context
of RE2020, the regulation that currently requires agencies to calculate
the carbon weight of their buildings. Responsible for environmental
strategy at PCA-Stream, Laélia Vaulot is waiting for the moment when she
can integrate the French database of material weights into the design
software used at the agency. Projects will then be designed from the
outset with a view to optimizing the carbon footprint. She estimates the
timeframe at a year and a half, or even two years, as this database,
made up of files provided by manufacturers who do not all use the same
semantics or the same units, currently lacks unity. At Zaha Hadid
Architects (ZHA) in London, architects also have their eyes fixed on
environmental excellence labels and the zero carbon objective (the fact
that a building produces, from the moment it is put into service, as
much energy as it consumes), which have become strategic for winning
over markets. At the head of an agency that has capitalized, since the
death of its founder in 2016, on buildings with voluptuous shapes and a
catastrophic carbon footprint, Patrick Schumacher is banking on machine
learning to create an aesthetic capable of creating desire in the new
context of energy sobriety. \"With AI, the skeleton of buildings can be
broken down into a multitude of elements of different nature and thus
reflect the process of optimizing materials according to their exposure
to wind, sun, the weight they support, etc. \"Architecture must now
adapt to its environment,\" he asserts, excited, as if he had just found
the philosopher\'s stone. \"We\'re going back to the vernacular!\" In
theory at least. In practice, the economic argument militates in favor
of standardization and ZHA continues to produce its interchangeable
buildings all over the world. Their aesthetic has been so widely
publicized that image generators know it by heart. \"We don\'t need to
train models, our name alone is unprompt \[from \"prompt engineer\",
writer of instructions for software\],\" Patrick Schumacher sneers. Fond
of these images produced by generative AI, he uses them mainly in the
early stages of project design, when it comes to generating ideas, but
recognizes their real creative power. To generate them, the agency
designs its own models within Stable Diffusion, whose open-source system
guarantees data protection -- unlike Midjourney, ChatGPT or Dall-E,
which appropriate everything that is injected into their system.
"Dissemination of knowledge" Intellectual property is also at the heart
of the Foster + Partners agency's thinking on artificial intelligence.
Under the leadership of Martha Tsigkari, director of the applied
research department, this multinational headquartered in London has been
exploring its potential for five years now. Initially, it focused on its
capabilities in solving complex analytical problems such as reverse
engineering. It thus succeeded in obtaining, from a sample of several
thousand laminated plates that had been deformed by temperature
variations, the equation defining the deformation process. Machine
learning technology is now being used to radically reorganize the work
process. In this area, the first major project consisted of indexing the
best practices guide, a huge tome designed by the technical design
department to answer questions related to the choice of materials, the
spatial organization of different building types, etc. \"The document is
so dense that, in fact, architects, when they have questions, address
themselves directly to those who wrote it.\" An application will now
provide them with turnkey answers. Trained exclusively with the content
of the guide, it does not add a \"personal touch\", as generative AIs
do, it does not hallucinate its answers, does not induce any bias, etc.
Any errors are called upon to be corrected by the members of the
technical design team, or even by any architect in the agency, as part
of a verification procedure developed to obtain, assures Martha
Tsigkari, total reliability. "The ability of large language models
\[these algorithms that exploit huge volumes of data to understand human
language\] and foundation models \[which integrate images, text, sound\]
to provide answers in real time promotes the dissemination of knowledge.
In an agency like ours, which has existed for fifty-five years, where
nearly 2,000 people work, this allows the hundreds of thousands of
documents that make up our archives to be accessible to all." A tool
similar to this best practices guide is being developed to index the
agency's drawings. Another, in the pipeline, will feed on the materials
database. In five years, the agency has developed all sorts of machine
learning applications, for objectives as diverse as optimizing ground
connectivity or the real-time interaction of several architects on 3D
models stuffed with data. Today, Martha Tsigkari is thinking about
mapping the agency's creative process. \"There is no question of
encroaching on the creativity of architects,\" she warns, \"it is what
we have most precious! The challenge is to allow them to go faster, and
to work better together.\" But what will a creator produce whose mind
has been washed out by large language models, drained by billions of
data? What remains of architecture when the relationship to time is
guided only by profit maximization?

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1775

In the realm of start-ups, the story of Mistral AI has all the makings
of a fairy tale. In June, the young French artificial intelligence (AI)
company made waves by raising €105 million, just a few weeks after its
creation, when it still had neither products nor revenues. And, on
Monday, December 11, it impressed with a new round of funding, of €385
million, and a valuation of €2 billion, already propelling it into the
coveted universe of unicorns, estimated at more than €1 billion. The
young 31-year-old CEO, Arthur Mensch, has big ambitions: \"We are
pursuing a clear trajectory: to create a European champion with a global
vocation in generative artificial intelligence, based on an open,
responsible and decentralized approach to technology.\" In short,
Mistral AI wants to launch language processing models capable of
competing with those of American giants such as OpenAI, the creator of
the conversational robot ChatGPT, Google or Meta. Moreover, American
investment funds -- Andreessen Horowitz and LightSpeed Ventures -- are
leading the new fundraising. They are accompanied by Salesforce, BNP
Paribas and CMA CGM, plus shareholders from the first round, such as
Bpifrance, the La Famiglia fund and Eric Schmidt (former CEO of Google).
The appeal of Mistral AI is linked to the prestigious profile of its
team: the three co-founders combine French academic excellence in
mathematics and computer science with the experience of leading American
AI giants: Arthur Mensch studied at the École Polytechnique and the
École Normale Supérieure before working for Google DeepMind. The
technical director, Thimotée Lacroix, spent eight years at the École
Normale Supérieure and then Meta. There, he worked on LLaMA, the
language processing model of the parent company of Facebook and
Instagram, with Mistral AI\'s scientific director, Guillaume Lample, who
also graduated from Polytechnique. \"Lobbying\" The young AI champion
enjoys strong political support. \"Mistral demonstrates that France has
all the assets to master artificial intelligence,\" tweeted the Minister
Delegate for Digital Affairs, Jean-Noël Barrot. \"Bravo to Mistral,
that\'s French genius,\" praised Emmanuel Macron on Monday during a
trip. The President of the Republic had already shared a stage with
Arthur Mensch in June at the VivaTech trade show. Mr. Macron had called
for \"French champions\" of AI and said he \"shared Mistral\'s
concerns\" about the draft European regulation, which he said could
\"hinder innovation.\" In the negotiation of this AI Act, France was
also accused of being an activist against certain measures in order to
align itself with the positions of its national start-up - \"Mistral AI
is lobbying, that\'s normal. But we are not fooled by anything,\" noted
European Commissioner Therry Breton in La Tribune -- and his public
affairs advisor, Cédric O. The former Secretary of State for Digital
Affairs is one of the three \"non-operational\" co-founders of Mistral
AI and owns shares (of which he, like the five other founders, sold a
small part as part of the arrival of new investors). On the product
side, Mistral AI targets businesses and developers. It has started to
stand out, with small models considered efficient for their size and
usable in open source, that is to say modifiable. Its first, Mistral 7B
(for 7 billion parameters), has been downloaded more than 1 million
times. Announced on Monday, Mixtral 8x7B uses the cutting-edge technique
\"sparse mixture of experts\", which consists of assembling 8 \"expert\"
AI models of 7 billion parameters each, or potentially 56 billion, but
using only two models, deemed the most suitable, for each word, which
allows it to go faster. Mistral would thus be more efficient than Llama
70B or GPT-3.5, the penultimate model from OpenAI. However, every fairy
tale has its challenges. With 22 employees and 500 million euros of
capital, will Mistral AI be able to compete with OpenAI, 770 employees
and already 11 billion dollars (10.2 billion euros) invested by
Microsoft? Even Anthropic, less well-known, has raised 6 billion dollars
from Amazon and Google. Young shoots need these giants for their
computing capacities, which are enormous in AI. And very expensive: more
than 100 million dollars to train GPT-4 according to OpenAI, which
remains loss-making. The founders of Mistral believe they can remain
independent -- they own the majority of the capital -- by spending
little. And by aiming more for efficiency than the race for size.
Training a model would cost them 1 million to 10 million euros, and
Mistral would be six times less expensive in terms of calculation for
customers, who are also worried about expenses. The other challenge is
the economic model. Mistral 7B and Mixtral8X7B can be downloaded for
free. Companies pay -- per hour of calculation -- only if they use the
Mistral platform to deploy or "specialize" (retrain on their data) the
models. In addition, Mistral also sells its models through APIs, an
interface that allows customers, for a few cents per request, to
integrate them into a service, such as a conversational robot. The best
model, Mistral-medium, is only available through this marketing method.
Will the revenues be sufficient? Mistral has just recruited a sales
director. Its assets will be the open approach and the growing desire
for technological and cultural sovereignty with models from Europe. But
the start-up will face tough competition: the cloud giants distribute
all types of models, including those from Mistral. Meta or the French
Hugging Face also do open source, and the French LightOn or the German
Aleph Alpha also claim the European card.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1776

INNOVATION\"We feel very good in Paris, why go to the United States?\"
When Le Figaro asked him if he and his two other co-founders could have
chosen California to set up the headquarters of Mistral AI, Arthur
Mensch frowned and sharply threw the ball back into his interlocutor\'s
court. At the head of this generative artificial intelligence start-up
created in early 2023 and which has just raised 385 million euros, the
young thirty-something assumes his European roots. He proudly claims it
for himself and his colleagues, Guillaume Lample and Timothée Lacroix,
who now carry - with the twenty or so employees of Mistral - part of the
hopes of a sovereign AI in Europe. In this sector, which has exploded
since the arrival of ChatGPT and OpenAI\'s large language models (LLM),
which can generate texts, images, sounds and videos as humans would,
Mistral AI is now one of the most prominent nuggets worldwide. Arthur
Mensch is convinced: his company can become a \"European champion\"
capable of competing with the LLMs of its American rivals, whether
Google (Gemini), OpenAI (ChatGPT) or Anthropic (Claude). Its first
model, Mistral 7B, launched in September, has already been downloaded a
million times, proof, according to him, of its qualities. \"In some
companies, we have even managed to dislodge ChatGPT. We have clearly
appeared on the radar of the Americans,\" says Arthur Mensch. The
start-up, for the time being still hosted in the premises of another
company, in the 10th arrondissement of Paris, is giving itself the means
to do so. In May, it had already raised 105 million euros. Its valuation
is now approaching 2 billion euros. Unprecedented for a company created
just over seven months ago. Unexpected for a Europe that discovered
during the launch of ChatGPT, on November 30, 2022, the lead taken by
the United States in this field. A year later, far from being left
behind as during previous technological accelerations, Europe seems to
have caught the wave. \"We were not the first to leave, but we have
caught up well,\" insists Arthur Mensch. The Old Continent has nearly
150 start-ups (including the United Kingdom) working on the subject of
generative AI, according to the media Sifted. Among them, a dozen or so
have raised funds in excess of 100 million euros in 2023. The sector has
a few emerging champions such as the German Aleph Alpha, which raised
\$500 million in early November. The start-up is also deploying a
competing language model such as GPT 3.5. Other start-ups such as the
German online translation specialist DeepL, Poolside AI, specializing in
AI dedicated to computer code and based in Paris, are also among the
promising young shoots. Dynamic ecosystem A dynamic ecosystem, which can
be explained among other things by a highly qualified and relatively
cheap workforce. France, for example, \"has excellent training in
mathematics and computer science, which are the two prerequisites for
AI\", insists Arthur Mensch. In its latest report on European tech, the
Atomico fund counts 120,000 highly qualified AI professionals of
European origin in 2023. This is ten times more than a year ago, with
Europe even having the luxury of overtaking the United States. This
figure should of course be put into perspective because many of them
historically worked for sector giants such as Google or Meta. But some
are now returning to the fold. Of Mistral\'s 22 employees, many come
from their ranks. Almost a month ago, French billionaire Xavier Niel
launched an independent AI research laboratory in Paris, alongside
Rodolphe Saadé (boss of CMA-CGM) and Eric Schmidt (former boss of
Google), called Kyutai. With a budget of 300 million euros for its
start-up, it also has half a dozen big names poached from Meta, Google
and Apple in its workforce. Also good news, start-ups in the sector can
count on the movement of large European groups. Aware of the potential
of generative AI, many of them are investing in the capital of
start-ups. French shipping company CMA CGM participated in the
fundraising of Mistral AI. Bosch, the parent company of Lidl, and German
software giant SAP have financed Aleph Alpha. These investors of today
will be the customers of tomorrow. An absolute necessity. European
start-ups already welcome American investors to their capital, they
cannot afford to have only American clients, otherwise they will
inevitably have to shift their center of gravity. However, a real
challenge awaits Europe before it becomes a dynamic market for
generative AI solutions, because not all companies are moving at the
same pace. \"Our discussions, including with large companies, show that
we are not there yet. Their departments responsible for digital
transformation are too slow,\" confides an employee of an American AI
company in Paris. Arthur Mensch, for his part, assures us that the
American companies he talks to are no more mature than their European
counterparts. The open source model The thirty-year-old also thinks that
Europe and Mistral AI have a card to play via the development of AI in
open models. Google and OpenAI charge for the use of their models, the
parameters of which are set in stone in advance. Mistral AI, for its
part, gives developers the possibility to download its training models
for free, allowing the community to use them to create its own
applications. It is an \"approach to the distribution of technology that
makes our interlocutors sovereign. And it is the way to have the best
models\", claims Arthur Mensch. Arriving after the proprietary models of
OpenAI or Google, open language models are gaining credibility. They can
be as efficient as their counterparts for less consumption. In other
words, Europe has some weapons to participate in the battle. \"Where we
will have the most difficulty, our Achilles heel, is managing to build
world leaders\", predicts Jean-Baptiste Bouzige, CEO and co-founder of
Ekimetrics, a French company specializing in the use of data and AI for
large groups. Funding, in particular, is still lacking. In mid-November,
the boss of Aleph Alpha judged that his company was \"in existential
danger\", given the amounts invested in its rival OpenAI, which received
more than 10 billion from Microsoft. At the end of September, 26.3
billion had been invested in AI in the United States, according to the
Atomico fund, compared to 5.8 billion in Europe. The cause is a
financing ecosystem that is still too timid in Europe on the big
tickets. As an illustration, the largest provider of funds to Mistral is
none other than the American fund Andreessen Horowitz, which is said to
have put up to 200 million euros on the table. Fortunately, the founders
still retain control of the capital. The other difficulty is the strong
American influence upstream of the AI value chain. AWS, Microsoft Azure
and Google Cloud are today ultra-dominant in the cloud industry, which
makes it possible to distribute language models in companies, including
those of Mistral AI. Which makes them essential. Equally essential is
the giant Nvidia and its graphics chips that provide the computing power
for AI uses. While it has identified its delay in these two areas,
Europe will take time to catch up. Finally, it will be necessary to
analyze how the AI Act, the European regulation, will have repercussions
on the industry. This text voted on Saturday after intense negotiations
raises some concerns. While the Commissioner for the Internal Market,
Thierry Breton, describes it as \"resolutely pro-business\", the French
President, Emmanuel Macron, already expressed reservations on Monday.
Question of capital \"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1777

What did the first spectators of Arrival of a Train at La Ciotat
Station, screened in 1896, feel? Posterity has recorded that many of
them, terrified, fled, convinced that they would be crushed by the
locomotive that was bearing down on them if they stayed in place. Could
this shock, which can soften our hearts as humans of the digital age, be
of the same order as the effect of shock mixed with fear that videos
generated by AI sometimes arouse? This is what Bruno Ribeiro suggests
with his XXL performance called Cellulo /d, soon to be presented at the
Festival of Lights in Lyon, on the facades of the Place des Terreaux. In
it, the artist confronts the cinematographic works of the Lumière
brothers with the \"hallucinatory\" visions resulting from algorithms.
\"I believe that artificial intelligence will change popular culture,
like cinema in its time.\" After the static image (Midjourney, Dall-E),
the production of videos via AI is also becoming more widespread,
boosted by the arrival of open source (until when?) and commercial
programs, which make it accessible to all non-coders with a bit of
patience, including artists. \"I didn\'t think I\'d see it so quickly,\"
admits Bruno Ribeiro. In just a few months, since his first research
related to Cellulo /d, new software and updates have been released,
which allow the creation of animated images based on simple \"prompts\"
(short texts describing the desired scene, serving as a written command
to the AI), by drawing on nebulous databases. \"It\'s the jungle,\" says
a player in the sector. \"The possibility, for everyone, of generating
videos from written instructions is still in its infancy, but it is
developing at high speed,\" confirms Eric Prigent, educational
coordinator at Fresnoy, a contemporary arts studio in Tourcoing. At
Vidéoformes, an international festival of hybrid and digital arts, the
trend is confirmed: in 2023, a third of the 800 videos received by the
jury used generative AI, while the phenomenon remained negligible in
previous years. \"BALBUTIEMENTS ET ROUAGES\" In his studio at the
Ménagerie de Verre in Paris, Bruno Ribeiro shares excerpts from Cellulo
/d, ahead of the screening in Lyon. The black-and-white scenes from
silent cinema mutate throughout the film, sometimes evoking a western
universe, a contemporary city or a space colony. The silhouettes and
faces generated by AI waver in constant instability (\"you\'d think a
Golem was trying to imitate a human,\" he smiles), and there are many
failures to achieve realism. Above all, there is this sensation of a
\"cliché\" image, created using hackneyed keywords (canyons and blue
jeans to represent the Wild West, cosmonauts to indicate space, cold
colors to depict a futuristic environment). So many weaknesses that the
artist does not shy away from: it is precisely these limits, these
errors that interest him, because they reveal how AI works and give food
for thought. \"What I stage are the beginnings and workings of
video-generating AI. I like to show the backstage and the derailments. I
often prefer making-ofs to films!\" Here, in fact, as a movie set, it is
the prompts that he chooses to expose to the public\'s eyes, clearly
visible, alongside the images. A way of opening the hood of artificial
intelligences that look like black boxes. Type a series of keywords
(example: \"cosmonauts waiting on a platform, futuristic city at night,
a spaceship passes. Buildings in the background, dust particles, debris,
8K, cinematic lighting, night, HDR, bright depth-of-field lights\") into
a generative AI program such as Stable Diffusion or Warp Fusion, and
presto, a video appears. It\'s hard to remain unmoved by the speed and
ease of the maneuver. Enough to fuel the fantasy of AI replacing the
artist, and of machine autonomy? This vision annoys Gregory Chatonsky,
pioneer of \"Net-art\": \"The fact that the images appear, that they
move, generates something of the order of delirium, of the fantasy of a
telepathic machine.\" Plunging a few lines of prompt into an AI is not
enough to become an artist, despite the sales strategies of Gafam
(\"superpowers on demand!\"). \"If the subject and the aesthetics are
not interesting, unique, rigorous, we quickly fall into the anecdotal,\"
says the director of Vidéoformes, Gabriel Soucheyre. A SPACE FOR
RESEARCH AND ATTEMPTS This is the interest of an artistic approach to go
beyond the initial fascination to critically approach the possibilities
of generative AI, to stretch them, unleash them and divert them at will.
In short, to make artificial intelligence more than a tool, a space for
research and attempts. And even, argues Grégory Chatonsky, \"a way of
approaching the world and navigating in human culture, whose quantity of
data after thirty years of accumulation on the Web has become
inaccessible.\" Data: the sinews of war! It is there, in the millions of
visuals gleaned from the Web that feed machine learning models, that
lies the novelty of these generative AI programs (rather than the
question of the prompt, the equivalent of which already existed in
computer code). Some artists find their account there, and play on the
uncertainty that it provokes. \"Most of the time, a prompt does not give
anything interesting. But by modifying a single value, we can obtain
something very different. I love this element of randomness, which
requires letting go\", explains Bruno Ribeiro. Others prefer to free
themselves from it, and create their own database, in the manner of the
first netartists. This is the case of Justine Emard, who sees in AI a
machine capable of going beyond \"the tangible reality of the human
being\". A revealer of the invisible. For her Hyperphantasia project,
which aims to connect the contemporary to the first images of humanity
(\"connect the pixel to the coal particle\", she says more nicely), she
created new images that seem to come from prehistory, by training
\"her\" synthetic neural network from a background of thousands of
visuals from the Chauvet-Pont-d\'Arc Cave Conservatory. The argument is
at once ethical, ecological and aesthetic: it is about refusing to use
the work of unpaid authors, just like the performances of distant server
companies - the artist opted for a Parisian data center. But also to
avoid the biases of the images provided by generative artificial
intelligence programs, based on opaque databases, often American.
GAFAM\'S TURBINE In the end, many creators and players in the sector
agree on this point: in the absence of real work and strong choices, the
results of Stable Diffusion and other programs are ultra-stereotypical.
\"Frighteningly homogeneous,\" one tells us, while another sees a \"lack
of surprise,\" a feeling of \"déjà vu, like at McDonald\'s.\" Thus, the
future is only represented by science fiction or fantasy imagery, women
only exist through Western canons of beauty, the figure of the doctor is
always a man. One certainty, for Justine Emard: the absence of renewal
of imaginations. Who feeds the AI? Real question, abounds Ethel
Lilienfeld, another artist who is a troublemaker for the Gafam. \"We
must be aware that these images reinforce existing clichés, that these
AIs are not neutral.\" In her short film EMI, which depicts the rise and
fall of a virtual influencer, with neon hair and white skin, she called
on Dall-E to enrich her ideas for setting and colours. When the curtain
falls at the end of the film, the virtual mask is torn, and the
flesh-and-blood double of the nymph appears. Scoop: behind the AIs,
there are still humans. ? \"By changing a single value of a \"prompt\",
you can get something very different. I love this element of randomness,
which requires letting go.\" Bruno Ribeiro artist

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1778

There are signs of a thaw, but the warming remains limited: on the eve
of a crucial meeting on the draft European regulation on artificial
intelligence (AI Act), Wednesday, December 6, the Minister Delegate for
Digital Affairs Jean-Noël Barrot said he was open to \"integrating\"
foundation models, these large language or image processing software
used by companies to create services such as ChatGPT or Midjourney. On
Friday, France and the Twenty-Seven gave a mandate to the Spanish
presidency of the Council of Member States to negotiate with Parliament
on Wednesday on their regulation. The latter has become a sticking
point, with France being accused of opposing it to protect its national
start-ups such as Mistral. \"First, Europe is the first democracy to
equip itself with a legislative framework for artificial intelligence,\"
says Mr. Barrot. From now on, AI systems that present high risks will
have to obtain CE marking, like toys or elevators, with the highest
audit and transparency obligations in the world. \"Autonomous driving
systems, medical diagnostics, CV sorting or credit allocation will be
covered, but not \"risk-free cases, such as entertainment or video
games,\" he notes. On the sensitive issue of foundation models, for
general use, their manufacturers should first, according to Mr. Barrot,
\"collaborate actively and loyally with client companies that will
deploy their models in high-risk services and who, in order to obtain CE
marking, will need information.\" Then, these manufacturers should
\"publish basic information on the operation of their models and the
typology of data used for their training.\" Finally, they should
\"adhere to a code of good conduct that will allow their practices to be
harmonised.\" Very tense context Furthermore, the minister envisages
that models published in open access, such as those of Mistral, Meta or
Hugging Face, could \"be exempted from certain obligations, because open
source offers guarantees of transparency and promotes fair
competition.\" The context is very tense. France, supported by Germany
and Italy, opposed the stricter obligations proposed in June by
Parliament, which provided for regular assessments and measures to
mitigate risks to fundamental rights (fight against errors, illegal
content, discriminatory bias, etc.). France also rejected the compromise
reserving these obligations for the most powerful models. The firmness
of Paris and Berlin has drawn criticism: \"Giving up on an ambitious
framework would weaken Europe\'s historic position,\" judged forty-nine
artificial intelligence specialists, including Yoshua Bengio and Raja
Chatila, in an op-ed in Le Monde. We must not \"place the entire
regulatory burden and its cost on companies that use foundation
models,\" warned the digital SME association SME Alliance on Linkedin.
The idea of codes of conduct is often associated with self-regulation
and considered too flexible. \"The AI Act will remain the most
restrictive regulation in the world,\" replied Mr. Barrot. France has
also been accused of following its start-up Mistral and its public
affairs advisor Cédric O, former Secretary of State for Digital Affairs,
too closely. \"Mistral AI is lobbying, that\'s normal. But we\'re not
fooled by anything. It is defending its business today, not the general
interest,\" pointed out European Commissioner Thierry Breton in La
Tribune at the end of November. \"We are guided by the general interest
and we exchange with all stakeholders, associations, rights defenders or
companies,\" defends Mr. Barrot. Finally, at the Future of Life
Institute, the NGO that initiated the March call for a \"pause\" in AI
research, France is criticized for \"playing into the hands\" of giants
like OpenAI or Google, which supported Paris\' position. Despite this,
Mr. Barrot has made the creation of \"European champions\" of AI,
desired by Emmanuel Macron in June, an \"absolute priority.\" \"Those
who design the systems have more influence than those who regulate,\"
the minister believes. The best protection is to have European models.\"
To appease, Mr. Barrot puts forward the more distant idea of \"changing
European laws\" on \"issues that are not intended to be addressed in the
AI Act.\" For example: continuing the fight against \"monopolies in
access to computing capacity,\" dominated by American giants. Or
copyright. A European text gives rights holders the possibility of
refusing the use of their content to train AI models. But eighty
organizations from the creative industries have accused Paris of
capitulating by not demanding that the AI Act force models to list the
protected content used. \"We must find the right balance between the
protection of rights holders and Europe\'s ability to develop its
models,\" replies Mr. Barrot. Will the Member States and Parliament find
a political agreement on Wednesday? Some believe the regulation is under
threat, because time is running out before the European elections in
June. \"The AI Act is not in danger. We are getting closer to an
agreement. This Wednesday\'s meeting will allow us to bring the points
of view a little closer together, but whatever happens, other meetings
will have to be held to further refine the rules,\" replied Mr. Barrot.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1779

Google inaugurated its largest cybersecurity research and development
center in Malaga, Spain, this week. Kent Walker, the American giant\'s
president of public affairs and general counsel, discusses the hot
regulatory news. LE FIGARO. - How can this new center help strengthen
cybersecurity in Europe? Kent WALKER. - This center will bring together
around a hundred experts from Google and other companies or European
institutions to share information on cyberthreats and develop
open-source tools based on artificial intelligence and other
technologies to better combat increasingly sophisticated threats. This
center will also be a place to train cyber skills, because the number of
cybersecurity experts in the world is very insufficient. Many companies
are unable to find talent, while there are tens of thousands of vacant
jobs. We are also investing \$10 million in European universities to
help them create cybersecurity training courses and attract students.
Cyberattacks are increasing despite increased investment by companies to
protect themselves. What needs to be improved? The more digital the
world becomes, the more attractive it becomes as a target for criminals,
but also for nation states that try to spread disinformation, interfere
with elections, etc. But these organizations are becoming more
sophisticated and are arming themselves with new technological tools.
But by working more together, we can exchange information and strengthen
our defenses. ChatGPT is celebrating its first anniversary. What struck
you most about this particular year? The attention paid to AI has been
surprising, but also welcome. For about ten years, visitors to Google
have been using AI without realizing it in Gmail, Google Maps or Google
Translate. The quality of these AIs has continued to improve. But the
arrival of chatbots has attracted public attention because we find
ourselves talking to another entity. However, chatbots are only a small
piece of the puzzle. The most important thing is that artificial
intelligence will enable dazzling advances in science, medicine, nuclear
power and agriculture. The whole world wants to regulate AI. Isn\'t
there a risk of fragmentation? AI is too important not to be well
regulated, and there is a delicate balance to be found so that it does
not harm innovation. We work with governments to be transparent around
this technology, which is complex to say the least, and to build trust.
But yes, we have rarely seen so much regulatory activity. However, this
regulation must not be a race. And we believe at Google that there is a
need for common standards and convergence of views. If we end up with as
many AI regulations as there are countries, it will slow down this
industry. Everyone agrees that we must prevent the explosion of
disinformation, that we must fight against discriminatory biases and
that we must have some form of control over this technology. We hope
that the G7 and the UN will encourage this convergence of views, and
that the European regulation on AI and the American presidential decrees
will have common aspects in order to facilitate compliance for
companies, large and small. We could also imagine that the certification
of an AI would be valid in many countries, so as not to have to
demonstrate the same thing hundreds of times. The negotiations around AI
Act are stumbling on the need to regulate or not large AI models. What
is Google\'s position? The common position adopted by France, Germany
and Italy (which advocate the creation of a code of good conduct for the
designers of these models, Editor\'s note) is thoughtful and sensible.
It is not necessarily necessary to regulate a tool: it is the purpose
that must be controlled. For example, car particulate emissions are
measured and regulated, but no one dictates how much aluminum should be
used in their manufacture. The original intent of the AI Act, which is
focused on the risks of services built around this technology, and is
proportionate, is sound. We also believe that there is a need at the
national level for a center of technical expertise. In the United
States, this would be the National Institute of Standards and
Technology, which would work alongside sector regulators in banking,
health care, transportation, etc. The truth is that each regulator is
going to have to regulate AI in its own sector. The idea of a single
regulator being able to regulate everything seems more difficult to
implement. Are there other points in this text that concern you? As you
can imagine, we are in discussions with the European authorities on
certain points. In our opinion, to effectively regulate a technology
that is evolving so quickly, we need to take a flexible and agile
approach. We are talking about putting in place rules that will still
have to be relevant in ten years, while we see incredible progress every
six months. AI is a unique opportunity for Europe to take technological
leadership and greatly boost productivity. 150 large European companies
wrote to the Brussels authorities to say "regulate us in a way that
allows us to continue to innovate". We had never seen this in the
debates of previous tech regulatory texts, and we believe it is a
recognition by the European business world of the power of AI. Google
defines itself as bold and responsible. How do you decide whether or not
to market an AI-based service? It is a balance that we work on daily. In
2018, we were the first large company to publish principles for the
governance and responsible use of AI. There have been cases where we
have not brought technologies to market. Facial recognition, for
example, while we certainly had some of the best tools in the world. But
we weren't convinced that the policies and laws were set up in a way
that would allow for the appropriate use of certain things. We had a
paper on lip-reading, which is very useful for people who have hearing
or speech problems. But we were concerned that an authoritarian
government could use it to monitor people remotely. So we rewrote the
project so that it would be useful when you're very close to a person,
but not usable from a mile away. I lead a team called the AI Review
Board that's looking at exactly these kinds of questions. As governments
get more involved, we'll be more transparent about these trade-offs and
share our approach. Google has just three months left to comply with the
Digital Market Act in Europe. Will you be ready? We're doing everything
we can to make it happen! We have hundreds, maybe thousands of engineers
working on implementing this across our eight DMA-targeted products
(Search, Maps, Shopping, Store, Google Play, Android, YouTube, and Ad
Tech). We're in regular contact with the European Commission to update
them on our progress and any issues we're encountering. This is a new
law, and we need to make sure we're interpreting it correctly. What are
the challenges you're encountering? For example, knowing what types of
consent are actually required. The DMA requires our users to agree to
the exchange of information between Google services, for example,
between your calendar and Google Maps. But we don't want our users to be
faced with a hundred consent requests that would make it harder to use
our services. So we've been trying to find a good balance, and it
requires a significant change in our technical architecture. It's a lot
of work.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1780

November 30, 2022 OpenAI releases ChatGPT. February 2023 Microsoft
launches its Bing Chat chatbot. March OpenAI lets developers build apps
on top of ChatGPT. Google releases its Google Bard replica. Microsoft
unveils Copilot personal assistant, integrated into its Microsoft 365
office suite. May Google injects generative AI into its Workplace office
suite. JULY Meta opensources the Llama 2 language model. August OpenAI
releases a more secure version of ChatGPT for enterprises.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1781

TECHNOLOGY The most enthusiastic compare the current revolution to that
of the arrival of the internet or the steam engine. Since ChatGPT burst
onto the world stage just a year ago, the notion of generative
artificial intelligence has been on everyone\'s lips. Enough to make us
forget the relative discretion with which OpenAI put its conversational
robot online on November 30, 2022. The general public then discovered
the impressive capabilities of these new technological tools based on
large language models (LLM) to create on demand, through simple
sentences (prompts) texts, images, videos or music as human beings would
do. Or even better in some cases. The craze is dazzling: 1 million users
in five days, 100 million in two months, an adoption speed unmatched in
technological history. Students, developers, creators, company employees
use it to save time and be more efficient in their daily lives.
Artificial intelligence technologies had already infiltrated companies
for several years, without it being noticed. Generative AI is opening
the era of their universalization. \"We have suddenly gone from an AI
reserved for experts in data science and development to a tool that all
professions can use to improve their daily lives,\" summarizes Nicolas
Levillain, Managing Director at BCG. Exceptional results This success is
first and foremost shaking up the sector of AI professionals. The \"Big
Tech\" are starting a race to catch up with the \"hare\" OpenAI and its
partner Microsoft. On all continents, technology giants are reorganizing
their offers around generative AI, accelerating the development of their
major foundation models and injecting these new technologies into all
their products. Competition is intensifying for what companies now
perceive as the largest platform of opportunities since the arrival of
the iPhone in 2007. To avoid a duopoly of closed systems such as iOS and
Android on smartphones, Meta is opening the game by offering large
language models in \"open source\". In other sectors, the emergence of
ChatGPT also triggers a scramble. The subject very quickly rises to the
level of the general management of companies. Aware of the added value
and potential productivity gains that are opening up, they nevertheless
seek to quantify them. \"In one year, there has been a real paradigm
shift in companies. They have gone from \"what is the real interest for
me\" to \"how do we get there?\" observes Hanan Ouazan, partner at
Artefact. \"We had been working on LLMs for years, but we were preaching
in the desert. \"ChatGPT changed everything,\" recalls Laurent Daudet,
CEO and co-founder of Light On. For most companies, 2023 was dedicated
to mapping use cases and testing tools with businesses. \"Safe\" use
cases, for which these very young technologies are quite mature and
well-suited, are multiplying rapidly. Conversational agents facilitating
an employee\'s or client\'s access to information, document synthesis
and analysis, computer code development, writing calls for tenders,
product sheets or financial reports, product design, etc. Several
businesses already use these tools on a daily basis, such as marketing
agencies, to generate variations of personalized advertising banners,
for example. Several large groups have launched by offering their
employees secure generative AI, such as Axa, PwC, or Moderna, which
developed a personalized version of ChatGPT based on a license from
OpenAI. \"MChat has changed the way we work on a daily basis. It has
allowed us to offload certain tasks, to save quality time in our
exchanges with teams but also with regulatory authorities, explains
Stéphane Bancel, the CEO of the biotech company. I myself have a version
of the software on my phone that is useful to me when I prepare
presentations and speeches.\" At Axa, which developed an internal
solution based on the group\'s data, \"Secure GPT does not make
decisions, but already allows 32,000 Axa employees to save time and
focus on tasks with higher added value,\" explains Marcin Detyniecki, AI
manager at the French insurer. Data protection Generative artificial
intelligence is also often used to improve the efficiency of chatbots,
as at Carrefour, CDiscount, Bricorama or at Ohm Énergie, a producer of
renewable electricity. In call centers, new tools can analyze all
exchanges, but also detect emotions through voice. The key is
productivity gains that can vary from 5% to 20%, and a proven increase
in customer satisfaction. \"Generative AI, when put in the right place,
produces exceptional results,\" insists Stéphane Roder, founding CEO of
AI Builders. \"We need to break down two major categories of use of
generative AI,\" adds Kheira Boulhila, VP Senior Technologies at
Salesforce. \"Everyday AI,\" which we will use mainly to save time and
increase efficiency in teams. We address repetitive tasks, we help with
execution. The second category is \"Game changing AI,\" technology
serving new economic models.\" In this second field, where the greatest
opportunities for generative AI lie, the path to take is much less
obvious. Most companies are in the experimental phase, but few have yet
moved into production. Even if things have accelerated in recent months,
especially on the other side of the Atlantic. Sometimes overwhelmed by
their own employees, who seized ChatGPT as soon as it was released,
companies are gradually discovering the associated risks, far from all
of which are under control. Starting with security. After Samsung\'s
mishap, where confidential data entered by engineers was spat out by
ChatGPT to other users, many companies have banned its use internally.
\"For the moment, we only feed our generative AI with public data (tax
texts, case law, banking regulations, etc.), we consider that our
questions, our prompts, our analyses are a form of intellectual
property\... We certainly did not want to put them on ChatGPT and enrich
our competitors,\" explains Philippe Trouchaud, partner at PwC France
and Maghreb. For sensitive sectors (banking, defense, health, etc.), it
is out of the question for certain data to leave the servers or run on
clouds that are potentially exposed to extraterritorial laws. A question
of costs In addition to the problems of \"hallucinations\" specific to
generative AI models - which push them to give answers even if they are
false -, to the risks in terms of cybersecurity, to the technical
complexities, there are also multiple legal questions. What is the risk
of relying on a large language model when we do not know what data was
used to train it? In the United States, almost all major AI suppliers
now undertake to pay legal costs if customers are sued for intellectual
property infringement after using their tools\... Not necessarily
reassuring and above all, it will not resolve the problems of
jurisprudence, experts believe. \"The worst thing for a company is to
develop a service or a product without knowing if it could be sued one
day,\" believes Françoise Soulié-Fogelman, scientific advisor at Hub
France IA. \"The question of cost is also a subject for companies,\"
agrees Laurent Daudet, from Light On. Behind their apparent \"magic\",
these technologies are expensive to use, which companies are discovering
and must learn to master, in order to properly assess their return on
investment. \"These technologies evolve extremely quickly over the
months, it is not easy for companies to find their way around,\" admits
Hanan Ouazan. \"Companies are in the process of choosing between
OpenAI-type systems, internal development which requires having the
skills, or intermediate solutions,\" adds Laurent Daudet. Companies are
moving towards using models that are better adapted to their needs, more
specialized, smaller and more efficient in environmental terms. In 2024,
projects in production will accelerate. Because one certainty has become
clear at the end of this first year. \"Generative AI is an imperative
for companies. \"This will completely change the way we work,\"
summarizes Nicolas de Bellefonds, associate director at BCG. With all
the associated training issues. Many studies have been trying in vain
for a year to quantify how many jobs will be eliminated because of
generative AI. \"I believe above all that employees risk being replaced
by other employees who know how to use AI. Training is absolutely
necessary to get the best of both worlds,\" concludes Jean-Paul Mazoyer,
deputy general manager of Crédit Agricole.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1782

In 1985, Apple ousted Steve Jobs, who would return twelve years later at
the company\'s request. In 2023, OpenAI, the creator of ChatGPT, ousted
Sam Altman, his co-boss, who was recalled five days later. History does
not repeat itself in practice. But the cultural terroir has remained the
same. Indeed, in Silicon Valley, digital entrepreneurs and technologists
are convinced that they have the power to change the world to make it
better in their own way. In its 2004 letter to shareholders, Google
already said: \"Google is not a conventional company. We have no
intention of becoming one.\" This pragmatic techno-utopianism is
accompanied by exotic cultural movements, such as libertarianism, and
relies on marginal personalities favored by the region\'s star system,
it is supported by venture capitalists. These techno-missionaries are
often atypical, bold, dissident and rich in their successes. In the
charter of OpenAI, we can read: "OpenAI's mission is to ensure that
artificial general intelligence \[AGI\] -- that is, highly autonomous
systems that outperform humans at the most economically profitable tasks
-- benefits all of humanity. We will seek to build safe and beneficial
AGI directly, but we will also consider our mission accomplished if our
work helps others achieve this outcome." In practice, things have
changed. The creation of OpenAI in 2015 by Silicon Valley celebrities
such as Elon Musk, Peter Thiel, Reid Hoffman and Amazon brought together
the two typical trends: selfless altruistic research in the field of
artificial intelligence (AI) for the good and protection of humanity,
and the creation of a structure capable of attracting the best talent
and significant financial resources. OpenAI is a non-profit company,
which is interesting from a tax perspective. Look elsewhere But, feeling
the pressure of competition coming with the arrival of new players and
wanting to stay in the AI race, OpenAI launched a subsidiary in 2019
under a "capped profit" model, which could raise funds, attract top
talent and inevitably develop commercial products. But still being led
by an idealistic board of directors. It has become a two-headed hydra
torn between its two philosophies: ensuring the good of the world with
AI in complete safety and moving very quickly in the face of the threat
of commercial players. But, as Facebook said ("move quickly by breaking
things"), OpenAI has progressed very quickly and, in its path, has
shaken up its statutes. This is what caused the chaos and the departure
and return of Sam Altman, whose real consequences on the AI market are
yet to come. One of the now-resigned board members reportedly said that
shutting down OpenAI outright would have been in line with its mission.
But the company's board had no investor representatives to challenge its
dogmatic stance. In fact, OpenAI was more about not letting Google
concentrate all the AI knowledge. As Elon Musk put it: "OpenAI was
created as an open-source \[software\] nonprofit company to counter
Google, but it's now a closed-source \[proprietary software\]
maximum-profit company controlled by Microsoft. That was not my
intention at all." But after leaving OpenAI, he immediately started xAI,
his own for-profit AI company. ChatGPT has ended up becoming a real
economic powerhouse, with a valuation of nearly \$90 billion \[€82
billion\] thanks to a very strong relationship with Microsoft, which
owns 49% of it after investing \$13 billion in it, something the board
of directors allowed to happen. In order to cover their immense
computing costs to advance AI, companies like OpenAI or Anthropic raise
billions of dollars, which creates tensions, because the power is in the
hands of members of a board of directors who seek to ensure that the
projects are beneficial to humanity as a priority. At OpenAI, the board
composed of worried people, called \"extinctionists\", wanted to slow
down developments. These are the advocates of effective altruism, the
"decelerationists," who fear the uncontrolled evolution of AI and its
lack of alignment with ethics. For his part, Mr. Altman is an advocate
of "effective accelerationism," a Silicon Valley fad that defends the
idea that the development of technology, especially AI, should be
accelerated for the good of humanity. There are also techno-optimists
for whom, in the age of technology, the powers of innovation and
capitalism should be harnessed to the extreme to drive radical change
--- even if it means upending today's social order. The move away from
academic idealism and toward commercial pragmatism must have created
conflict at OpenAI. What's more, at the time of Mr. Altman's ouster, it
seems that teams at OpenAI had developed a superintelligence product,
called Q\* (Q-STAR), which may have seriously upset the board and
precipitated the change of boss. The short five-day crisis of
instability at OpenAI may have worried its existing or potential
customers, who probably started looking elsewhere, for example at the
free AI software that OpenAI is trying to marginalize by saying it is
dangerous, because it has no controls. This will lead to a resurgence of
activity at OpenAI in an attempt to maintain its reputation and its
significant lead. And in the entire AI sector. But this crisis is not
the last episode in the Sam Altman saga.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1783

Register of the Church of Paris, begun by me, Guillaume Picard,
licentiate in law, scribe and notary of the said church. In the year of
our Lord 1409, Thursday, July 15th. » There is something moving in
looking, carefully opened on a table in the National Archives, at the
Gothic serifs on the thick manuscript kept six centuries ago by this
canon of Notre-Dame. It looks, in Latin, like a compilation of minutes
of meetings as they would be kept today. With the details of the
decisions taken and the list of canons signing for these \"boards of
directors of the chapter\", according to the amused terms of the
historian Darwin Smith. In total, 170 volumes of acts were thus
recovered after the Revolution, in 1790, by the National Archives. A
goldmine for research. However, deciphering spider\'s feet,
abbreviations, paper or stained parchment was until now a time-consuming
task for paleographers. By putting Notre-Dame de Paris back in the
spotlight, the fire of April 2019 changed the situation and offered
historians a leap in space and time: an artificial intelligence program
is now able to decipher these acts with an accuracy rate varying from
88% to 94% depending on the registers, according to the designers.
Coordinated at the Laboratoire de médiévistique occidentale de Paris
(LaMOP) at the Sorbonne by Julie Claustre (now a university professor at
Paris-Cité) and Darwin Smith, emeritus research director, the project
called \"e-NDP\" has so far focused on the first twenty-six volumes,
whose 14,600 pages run from 1326 to 1504, the medieval period in the
classical sense of the term. First step of this experimental program,
restore. Stains, humidity, wear and tear... Eight volumes were taken.
Second step, digitize. Finally, it was necessary to "train" the machine,
using now classic HTR (handwritten text recognition) techniques, but
adapted to these texts themselves. Because writing changes over time,
according to the canons and the eras. Obtain a reliable algorithm At the
beginning, we feel that the notes are taken during the meetings. Then
the reports are clearly copied cleanly, more regular, without crossings
out. Physically isolate the different parts of each page, visually sort
between the lists of canons, the juxtaposed texts and the annotations in
the margin. It took eight attempts, with about fifteen historians to
check the results obtained on different extracts, in order to correct
the shot (we say fine tune in expert language) and obtain a sufficiently
reliable algorithm. Result: \"Five million words in which we can do
structured searching. It\'s amazing!\" Julie Claustre enthuses. \"Now we
know that it works, we can follow people, functions. We can also search
precisely on a word or a theme.\" Feast of Saints Peter and Paul, June
29, 1326, that\'s where it all begins. Before that, we had no written
trace of the chapter\'s deliberations. \"We must understand that in the
Middle Ages, written culture very gradually replaced oral culture,\"
explains Darwin Smith, while Isabelle Bretthauer, curator of the
National Archives, carefully turns the pages of paper - \"Rare for the
time,\" she specifies, admiringly. \"In 1396, we see how the canons
organized the recasting of a large bell, which fell without causing any
casualties, but caused a lot of damage. Then, it had to be passed
through the streets to the cathedral\...\", says Julie Claustre. We
change register, this one is in parchment, that is to say made from
animal matter. If these notarized texts are such a mine of information,
it is because these canons are often great officers of the kingdom,
advisors to the king, leading academics. \"Notre-Dame is a magnetic pole
that brings together the thinking heads of theology, law and science,\"
explains Darwin Smith. What we discover there is the influence of the
secular world, an interpenetration of secular and ecclesiastical
fashions. In 1452-1453, we see that, every Sunday, the artisan bakers
gather around the two baptismal vats placed one on the right and the
other on the left of the cathedral. This is their place. We can imagine
that they serve them, as has been observed elsewhere, as a vat for
measuring grain. But this is not specified. The fact remains that one
day the chapter decides that enough is enough\...\" Role of historians
Of course, our historians are not the first to work on this thick
corpus. Others have tackled it, including the canons of the following
centuries, whose annotations can be seen here and there, showing that
they went to look for traces of a jurisprudence, a division, an
established decision. The most notable work ever carried out on these
registers, the Cartulary of Notre-Dame de Paris, in four volumes, dates
back to one of the first directors of the Ecole nationale des chartes,
Benjamin Guérard, in 1850. Should we see this as a sign: the era is
Gothic, Victor Hugo mourns a cathedral in decay, Viollet-le-Duc is
called to his bedside. Could it be when buildings collapse that we
remember the role of historians? \"But the corpus is so enormous!\"
notes Julie Claustre, rolling her eyes. This is where artificial
intelligence proves to be a valuable tool by transforming the records
into an open database, searchable, indexable, and manipulated at will,
shedding light on the Middle Ages in its ordinary daily life. Like this
man who had a falling out with the canons because he sold his catch
without asking permission, and who explains, to exonerate himself, that
having \"spasmed\" (knocked out) his fish, he had to sell them without
delay. We are at this level of documentary precision, admires Rebecca
Lelièvre, a master\'s student at Paris-I, who works on water rights in
the Middle Ages. An essential subject in the life of the chapter.
Firstly because a third of the priests\' food is made up of fish; then,
because it is a source of profit, notes the student with a smile: \"The
term Pecunia comes up often\...\" \"You have to play with the machine,\"
she testifies, \"because it can easily confuse the \"T\" and the \"C\"
in this Latin in Gothic writing. I often double my requests onpiscari
\[\"fish\"\] with another, by writingpistari. Similarly, in
abbreviations, a nominative can pass for an accusative. »So, in the
lemma search (fixed part of the word, without declension), after typing
aqu.\*" (for "water"), juris.\*" (for "law"), or stagn.\*" (for
"marsh"), the student notes the occurrences, their dates, and the
corresponding registers, then goes to the virtual library of the
National Archives website where all the digitized pages can be
consulted... Having passed through Madrid and data science, the Peruvian
historian Sergio Torres Aguilar was a postdoctoral fellow at LaMOP.
Naturally, he was the one responsible for setting up the algorithm. He
is satisfied: "The model that we have developed can now be used for
other archival centers," says the man who was called to Luxembourg for
similar work on old documents from the Grand Duchy. "The project is open
source. There was discussion between us of course, but, apart from the
obligation to cite, we decided not to put any locks. \"Anyway, when
there are locks, they always end up jumping,\" says a scribe of the
third millennium, notary 2.0.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1784

The wit of Silicon Valley, the dramatic tension of The Morning Show and
a bit of the atmosphere of Black Mirror. » The soap opera of the crisis
at OpenAI kept the world in suspense, as if it had mixed the most
addictive series from Netflix or AppleTV. It was an expert in artificial
intelligence (AI), Gary Marcus, who thus described the Sam Altman affair
on X. The star boss of the most prominent artificial intelligence
start-up was fired, to everyone\'s surprise, then replaced, before
announcing his departure to Microsoft, then making a triumphant return,
after having been supported by 700 employees out of 770... Beyond the
almost fictional side of this business saga, the case of OpenAI and Sam
Altman is emblematic of the philosophical and political debates that
cross the AI sector. The entrepreneur wants to embody the return of a
messianic discourse in the sector, after years in which the leaders of
giants like Google, Meta (Facebook, Instagram) or Apple have had to
police their attitude, in response to criticism of their power and the
effects of their activity. \"I hate to say this, because it sounds
arrogant, but, before OpenAI, what was the last real big scientific
breakthrough that came out of a Silicon Valley company?\", he asked,
falsely naive, in a podcast at the beginning of June, regretting that
recent years have seen the creation of companies \"very well valued on
the stock market\" in web and mobile services. \"The technological
progress that we will make in the next hundred years will far exceed
anything we have done since we mastered fire and invented the wheel,\"
he states in a 2021 manifesto entitled \"Moore\'s Law for everything\",
in reference to the principle of exponential growth in the computing
capacity of computer chips. The engine of this revolution -- which,
according to Mr. Altman, will make it possible to "colonize space",
"make nuclear fusion work", "cure all diseases" or "build new realities"
-- is of course artificial intelligence and the advent of a supposed
"superintelligence", which would surpass that of humans. The crisis at
OpenAI has shaken up Sam Altman's upward trajectory. Faced with certain
contradictions in the atypical OpenAI project, he was sidelined, because
some criticized him for moving too quickly, with a policy that was too
commercial, contrary to the original mission of the structure. The
leader finally won and was reinstated, thanks to the support of
Microsoft, but, in the new OpenAI, he finds himself facing new
challenges. An archetype of Silicon Valley Sam Altman was born on April
22, 1985. All the articles describe this almost "quadra" as precocious.
\"He embodies the classic path of the Silicon Valley entrepreneur,\"
says Olivier Alexandre, a sociologist at the CNRS and author of La Tech.
Quand la Silicon Valley refait le monde (Seuil, 260 p., 23 euros).
Raised in Saint-Louis, Missouri, in a Jewish family -- his mother a
dermatologist and his father a real estate agent -- Sam Altman was
immersed as a child in a \"nerd\" atmosphere, a fan of computers and
science, dreaming with his two brothers of space travel, playing video
games or guessing square roots. At the age of 8, he was given a MacLII,
which he quickly learned to take apart. Computers and online forums
offered him an escape, because \"growing up as a gay man in the Midwest
in the 2000s was not the most pleasant thing,\" the man who came out in
high school told the New Yorker. Admitted to Stanford, the prestigious
Silicon Valley university, he left -- like Steve Jobs, Bill Gates or
Mark Zuckerberg -- after two years of computer science courses, more
attracted by the boom in the tech sector. At 19, he founded the start-up
Loopt with his partner. The service, designed to geolocate friends,
struggled to convince, but it was still resold for 43 million dollars
(39.5 million euros). Above all, this first business brought Mr. Altman
through the Y Combinator (YC) incubator, whose founder he impressed. The
latter, who saw in him the equivalent of a young Bill Gates, hired him
at YC and then propelled him, at less than 30 years old, in 2014, to the
head of what became a place of power in Silicon Valley. YC is a hub that
sees all the founders and start-up files pass through, including Airbnb,
Dropbox, Stripe, etc. With his calm style, his youthful allure, his
T-shirt and jeans look and his avowed Democratic leanings, Sam Altman
embodies the Californian \"techie\" to the point of cliché. He seems the
opposite of Elon Musk, a provocative and flamboyant rocket builder,
quick to challenge Mark Zuckerberg to a boxing match, who became a
supporter of Donald Trump and was recently singled out for his
anti-Semitic comments. But the two men have more in common than it
seems. Like Mr. Musk, Mr. Altman wants to expand YC from 2014 to basic
sciences, robotics, biotechnologies, energy\... He himself invests in
many projects, including the nuclear fusion start-up Helion (and, since
then, in Retro Biosciences, dedicated to extending life, or in
Conception, whose goal is the in vitro creation of eggs from stem cells,
in particular to allow male couples to have children). Mr. Musk and Mr.
Altman also both believe in the immense potential of artificial
intelligence. The original paradox of OpenAI In 2015, Sam Altman created
OpenAI with Elon Musk and Peter Thiel (whom he met at YC). The latter
made a fortune by reselling the PayPal payment service and recently
invested in the artificial intelligence start-up DeepMind, quickly
bought by Google. Among the other founders of OpenAI is Greg Brockman, a
former Stripe employee who also went through Y Combinator. \"The
conversations around the birth of OpenAI are steeped in transhumanism
and long-termism,\" explains Olivier Alexandre. They combine, on the one
hand, the idea that we can improve humans through technology and AI and,
on the other hand, the need to take into account existential risks
threatening billions of human lives, such as those theoretically posed
by\... AI. Because the latter is "potentially more dangerous than
nuclear bombs," Mr. Musk declared in 2014. The founders have all read
the book -- "excellent," according to Mr. Altman -- by the Swedish
transhumanist philosopher and long-termist Nick Bostrom,
Superintelligence, which imagines a superhuman AI and its dangers for
humanity. "My problem is that when my friends drink too much, they talk
about the ways the world could end," the entrepreneur joked in 2016 in
the New Yorker, citing AI prominently, along with "synthetic viruses."
He added that he was -- like Mr. Thiel -- a survivalist, stockpiling
"guns, gold, iodine or gas masks," and was ready to retire to an
isolated property south of San Francisco. Asked about this point during
his visit to Paris in the spring, the hypochondriac Mr. Altman assured
that he had since taken a step back and, above all, cultivated \"a boy
scout side\", which pushes him to spend his weekends on his ranch, with
his companion, smartphone turned off. An antidote to the risk of a
dangerous superintelligence, OpenAI\'s aim is to \"create general
artificial intelligence, in a safe and beneficial way for humanity\".
The founders also chose the non-profit form for their company, in order
to avoid seeing a project deemed so crucial subject to financial logic.
OpenAI is therefore financed by \$1 billion in donations, notably from
Messrs. Thiel and Musk, and promises to publish all its research in open
source free access (hence the name). And its founders present their
alternative lab as the means of preventing AI from remaining in the
hands of a monopoly or an oligopoly, implicitly denouncing the important
place taken by Google in the sector. All these arguments help to poach
top researchers\... from competing teams. Thus, Mr. Musk recounted
having fought to snatch Ilya Sutskever from Google, a young star who,
with the bigwig Geoffrey Hinton, had made a decisive leap in image
recognition. The team moved into a small building in the center of San
Francisco, where it had another Elon Musk project as a neighbor, the
brain-machine implant start-up Neuralink. The forward march of AI star
Sam Altman would spread his wings with OpenAI and make it a global
success story. In the early years, the lab created an AI that plays a
video game, another that pilots a robot hand capable of completing a
Rubik\'s Cube. Its researchers are wondering - a vast task - about the
means of \"aligning\" an AI with \"human values\". But a major turning
point occurred in 2019: Elon Musk left (he considered himself to be in a
conflict of interest, because Tesla was also recruiting in AI), Sam
Altman became CEO and affirmed his conviction that improving AI models
requires their size, which will require phenomenal computing power,
therefore billions of dollars. He then turned to Microsoft. \"I remember
the first time you called me to ask me for cloud credits,\" said Satya
Nadella, CEO of Microsoft, during a joint conference on November 6. The
old software giant invested \$1 billion, in the form of access to its
data centers. Sam Altman created a for-profit structure for this, with
original, even baroque governance. Dividend distributions are limited to
one hundred times the initial investment. The phenomenal wealth that AI
is supposed to create, according to Mr. Altman, must then return to the
non-profit structure. The latter\'s board of directors also remains
sovereign and Mr. Altman does not hold any shares. In the process,
OpenAI decided not to publish the GPT-2 language processing model as
open source, citing security reasons and the risk of seeing this
ancestor of ChatGPT participate in disinformation. On November 30, 2022,
OpenAI launched ChatGPT. The technology is not new, but the
conversational robot bluffs the world with its ability to create texts
that appear to be written by humans. In two months, the service exceeds
100 million users. Microsoft announces more than \$10 billion of
investment in OpenAI, valuing the company at around \$30 billion. In
March, OpenAI launched GPT4, then the paid version of ChatGPT, then the
version for businesses, then the DallE 3 image generation model... In
the fall, a fundraising round was being prepared to buy out employee
shares, which valued the company at \$90 billion. At the same time, Sam
Altman became a star tech boss and spilled over into the political
arena. In May, dressed in a suit, he went on a tour worthy of a head of
state, stopping off in Washington, Toronto, Rio, Lagos, Seoul, Warsaw,
London and Paris, where he was received by Emmanuel Macron. At a hearing
in May before the American Senate, he gave a speech that was
appreciated, because he seemed to display a greater willingness to
reform than the digital giants or social networks in their early days:
he argued for AI regulation, shared his fears and assured that he was
acting \"with the interests of humanity in mind\". Seen as an outsider
from a start-up, ChatGPT was also less criticized for its flaws and
errors than the chatbots launched in the past by Google or Meta. At the
major summit on the risks of artificial intelligence organized in the
United Kingdom at the beginning of November, participants discussed the
idea of an \"IPCC of AI\", reminiscent of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change, but also of an agency inspired by the International
Atomic Energy Agency, or of a collaborative project close to the CERN
cyclotron. All concepts dear to Sam Altman, fascinated by the father of
the nuclear bomb Robert Oppenheimer and his Manhattan Project. "OpenAI
should in principle be a government-led project," he explained to
Business Insider. In the same vein, Mr. Altman imagined in the New
Yorker having citizens from various continents appoint to the OpenAI
board. The entrepreneur has also toyed with the idea of electing a tech
candidate to the post of governor of California in 2018, dreamed of
launching alternative cities and he campaigns for universal basic
income, seen as a solution if AI one day takes over a large part of the
work. In recent weeks, Sam Altman seemed to want to accelerate again: in
the Financial Times, he announced the creation of GPT5 and said he
wanted Microsoft to invest "a lot more" in the long term. He was also
looking to raise billions of dollars from Saudi funds to create a
computer chip company, in order to reduce dependence on its suppliers
and costs. He envisaged a start-up with a former Apple designer, to
create a device dedicated to AI. \"Accelerationists\" versus
\"decelerationists\" But the meteoric trajectory of OpenAI and Sam
Altman is provoking opposition. A first fundamental criticism attacks
the goal of the company and the very concept of \"general artificial
intelligence\": the nature and possibility of such superintelligence are
contested in the AI community. The idea serves \"a dangerous
techno-utopia\", solutionist and elitist, even eugenicist because it
aims to surpass man, denounce certain researchers in AI ethics,
including Emile Torres, former PhD student in philosophy and former
close to the transhumanist and long-termist movements. Focusing on the
hypothetical long-term risks of AI would prevent us from concentrating
on regulating its immediate and real risks, such as sexist or racist
biases, discrimination, the theft of works or surveillance, denounce the
NGOs AI Now Institute or Distributed AI Research Institute (DAIR). Above
all, another front has opened up, gradually creating a schism within the
very supporters of a \"beneficial superintelligence\": neologisms have
appeared to distinguish the most \"catastrophists\" (\"doomers\") from
the most \"techno-optimists\" or the \"accelerationists\" (supporters of
speeding up research) from the \"decelerationists\". Even within OpenAI,
\"tribes\" have formed, Mr. Altman acknowledged in 2019, according to
The Atlantic. His business turn contributed to the departure of a dozen
engineers, who left to create the start-up Anthropic. The latter claims
to prioritize the "safety" of AI and has connections to effective
altruism, the utilitarian school of thought aimed at maximizing the
impact of philanthropy that gave birth to long-termism: among its first
investors were sympathizers of the movement such as Sam Bankman-Fried
(ex-FTX) or Dustin Moskovitz (of the Open Philanthropy fund). This
divide largely contributed to the surprise ouster of Sam Altman (in
addition to personal tensions, debates on access to computing capacity,
as well as annoyance at seeing Sam Altman invest in other start-ups, at
the risk of conflicts of interest). In the eyes of several OpenAI
members, including Ilya Sutskever, Mr. Altman was trying to move forward
and launch products too quickly, for a purpose deemed too commercial and
contrary to OpenAI's safety policy. "\[By firing Mr. Altman\], the board
was simply fulfilling its mission, which is to ensure that OpenAI builds
AI that benefits all of humanity," Mr. Sutskever, himself a board
member, justified in the heat of the moment during an internal meeting.
In recent months, the researcher had grown closer to the most concerned
faction and, for example, during an internal seminar, had commissioned a
wooden statuette representing an AI "not aligned" with human values,
before symbolically burning it, reports The Atlantic. Two board members,
Helen Toner and Tasha McCauley, were also close to the effective
altruism movement, notes Slate. The first had been criticized by Mr.
Altman for an academic article in which she regretted that the launch of
ChatGPT, in beta and "without a complete risk assessment," had triggered
a "race to the bottom" and a wave of competing chatbots, revealed the
New York Times. She also judged Anthropic's security policy to be more
virtuous than that of OpenAI (which, on this subject, recalls having
conducted six months of tests before launching GPT4). According to
Reuters and The Information, the recent advances by OpenAI researchers
on a model called Q\*, apparently capable of solving certain
mathematical problems, also reinforced the board's concerns, as did Mr.
Altman's reduction of a long-term research team of Mr. Sutskever. Latest
sign of the divorce: Emmett Shear, the CEO appointed by the board to
replace Mr. Altman, estimated in a June podcast "between 5% and 50%" the
probability of seeing a superintelligence self-replicate and wipe out
humanity. He also cited Eliezer Yudkowsky, a blogger known in AI as a
radical "doomer" (the latter declared on X during the crisis that
"OpenAI's goal was to wipe out humanity") as a reference. The rebels
have received external support: "The last few days have shown how much
the idea that Sam Altman should be accountable to anyone is a myth,"
Toby Ord, a figure of long-termism, said on X. "We need leaders who
understand AI and can oppose Sam," added Elon Musk, former founder
turned competitor of OpenAI with his start-up X. The Future of Life
Institute, an NGO behind the letter signed in the spring by researchers
asking for a "pause" on AI research, accuses OpenAI (and other companies
in the sector) of double-talk on regulation. She criticizes Sam Altman
for having tried to soften the AI Act regulation by threatening to
withdraw from Europe, before retracting. Some movements, such as
PauseAI, go so far as to call for a suspension of research and Sam
Altman has several times been greeted at conferences by placards from
activists accusing him of endangering humanity with his
superintelligence projects... Ironically, even the existential risk
theorist Nick Bostrom recently expressed alarm at the excessive ambient
worry that could end up leading to a "ban" of AI. "Doom and gloom is
heading for catastrophe," mocked Yann LeCun, director of AI research at
Meta and a self-proclaimed optimist, on X. Rather centrist in these
debates, Sam Altman has gradually joined the accelerationist camp, Mr.
Alexandre explains. Why, then, does he continue to regularly compare the
risks of AI to those of a pandemic or a nuclear attack? \"He understood
that tech is about products but also about a story.\" \"Basically,
OpenAI has fired those who truly believed in the existential risks of AI
and kept those for whom it is just a communication gimmick,\" said
researcher Timnit Gebru of the NGO DAIR. The new OpenAI, in the shadow
of Microsoft In the battle against opponents who wanted to slow him
down, Sam Altman finally won an almost total victory: he was reinstated
in OpenAI, like his friend and co-founder Greg Brockman. Of course, an
internal investigation will take place, but Mr. Altman even had the
pleasure of seeing Ilya Sutskever mention on X his \"regrets\" for
having participated in the council putsch\... In the imagination of
Silicon Valley, this triumphant return is reminiscent of that of Steve
Jobs at Apple. \"The difference is that Jobs was on the side of the
\"dreamers\", the protesters opposed to the management, considered too
business-oriented\", Mr. Alexandre qualifies. Another lesson of the
crisis: Microsoft\'s influence on OpenAI will be strengthened. The
software giant will be represented on the future board. And its CEO Mr.
Nadella, who actively worked for Mr. Altman\'s return, has asked for
\"governance changes\". This influence could grow even more if, as Mr.
Altman wanted, Microsoft invests even more. \"For Microsoft, this all
ends in a fairy tale\", comments Dan Ives, an analyst at Wedbush
Securities. This development will reinforce criticism of OpenAI\'s
independence and openness: \"OpenAI was created as an open-source,
non-profit structure to be a counterweight to Google, but it has become
a closed company, which maximizes profit and is effectively controlled
by Microsoft,\" Elon Musk joked in January, who sometimes lets the idea
of attacking Mr. Altman hang in the air to get his initial donations
reimbursed. The strengthened partnership between OpenAI and Microsoft
will also stir up debate on the weight of digital giants in AI and the
difficulties of developing an independent start-up. Anthropic has raised
\$6 billion from Google and Amazon. In the long term, entrepreneur Sam
Altman will also have to solve business problems: for the moment,
ChatGPT is expensive to calculate (a few cents per request) and would be
loss-making, as would its equivalents deployed in Microsoft services,
including the computer code writing assistance tool GitHub Copilot,
according to the Wall Street Journal. The storm experienced by OpenAI
could further push large cloud providers like Amazon -- or Microsoft --
to offer a variety of AI providers and models, some of which are
smaller, less powerful and more specialized but less expensive than
those of OpenAI. Finally, Mr. Altman will have to meet the challenge of
long-term research, because current language processing models are
limited. Sam Altman would therefore normalize. In early November, during
his first Keynote in front of developers, he looked like an average tech
company boss touting his new products. "OpenAI is getting closer to a
classic Silicon Valley company," thinks Mr. Alexandre. Closely
associated with Microsoft, will Sam Altman also be able to continue to
multiply investments in start-ups? Let us recall that Google has put its
founders' most futuristic projects in order. "Sam Altman will have a
harder time convincing people that he is working for the good of
humanity and not for his shareholders." \"He is now just another CEO of
a digital giant,\" wrote Bloomberg columnist Dave Lee, calling
self-regulation on AI a \"masquerade.\" NGOs also see the OpenAI crisis
as a reason not to relax draft regulations such as the European AI Act.
Others, such as Mr. Alexandre or the non-profit foundations Signal,
Mozilla or Wikipedia, see it as a question mark over AI governance.
\"Promises about \'beneficial AI,\' \'for humanity\' or \'aligned with
our values\' overlook the fact that these issues are political, with
disagreements and compromises. \"Let\'s not pretend that AI changes
anything about that,\" wrote former MEP Marietje Schaake on X, reacting
to the OpenAI saga. \"I\'m happy to be back working on the most
important mission in the world, with a team that is a family,\" Mr.
Brockman, Mr. Altman\'s lieutenant, said on X on Thursday.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1785

They were proselytizers of research in human and social sciences based
on Twitter\'s activity, today they dissuade their students from using
the social network that has become X. The cause is the end of the free
API, the programming interface that allows software to be connected so
that they can exchange data. But not only that. As early as 2009, Nikos
Smyrnaios, professor of information and communication sciences at the
University of Toulouse-III, and Bernhard Rieder, lecturer in the same
discipline at the University of Amsterdam, had collected more than 5.8
million tweets to study the dissemination of news on the network. And
this, thanks to data extraction and analysis software using the Twitter
API (DMI-TCAT). Bernhard Rieder has since designed free software that
makes such work possible on around twenty platforms as part of the
CAT4SMR (Capture and Analysis Tools for Social Media Research) project.
This was before October 2022 and the acquisition of the little blue bird
by Elon Musk. Nikos Smyrnaios stopped all study of X due to the lack of
access to the platform\'s data. While Twitter was long a privileged
field of investigation for research, due to the public nature of its
data and its use by many political and media actors, the professor now
dissuades his students from studying it quantitatively. \"As a thesis
director, I will not encourage a student to work on a subject that would
require a quantitative approach, because it will not be possible,\" he
explains. Uncertain reliability of data For Bernhard Rieder, conducting
quantitative surveys on X is still feasible and worthy of interest,
despite a 16% drop in the number of daily users in one year (figure from
the American firm Sensor Tower in September). He nevertheless admits
that the change in the method of access to the API complicates the study
of X and has scuttled part of his work. The software he designed is no
longer usable by the scientific community for free. When the end of the
free API was announced, researchers and doctoral students urgently
collected all the data they needed. But some projects had to be
abandoned. A student of Mr. Rieder, author of a thesis on the
functioning of the X API, had to abandon writing an article on the
subject, because his results were obsolete. In concrete terms, to carry
out a research project on content from this social network, it comes to
\$5,000 per month (4,600 euros), according to Mr. Rieder. In addition,
researchers are now limited to one million tweets, compared to several
million previously. But the cost is not the only obstacle. X is not
Twitter. Of course, this platform did not wait for the arrival of Elon
Musk to be a place for the propagation of hateful content and \"fake
news\". But the moderation of content, already insufficient, has
deteriorated due to the dismissal of some of the employees responsible
for the fight against disinformation, online hatred or harassment. The
increased intervention of Elon Musk and his teams on the visibility of
content makes the reliability of the data uncertain and questions the
relevance of studying them, according to Mr. Smyrnaios. It is no longer
so much the popularity of a post and the engagement it generates that
ensure the promotion of content as the possession of a Twitter Blue
account (a certification that only certifies the fact of having paid to
obtain it), or the arbitrary choices of Elon Musk. Finding the flaw
\"Today, these algorithmic effects are so strong that we do not measure
social processes, but the decisions of the boss\", summarizes the
professor from Toulouse. The instability of the platform since the
arrival of Elon Musk also makes him fear a change in the conditions of
access to data over time, despite the payment of the API. Some
researchers choose to migrate to other platforms whose API is free, such
as TikTok, Instagram, YouTube. But lexicometric analysis techniques are
unsuitable for the quantitative analysis of these social networks that
favor sound and image. New software must therefore be developed and new
research methods must be tested, such as the automatic transcription of
video audio and the analysis of image recurrences using artificial
intelligence software. Other researchers choose to examine corpora of
tweets that have already been archived. And some with a more \"tech\"
profile, like Mr. Rieder, are working to find the flaw in order to
collect quantitative data for free. They use data extraction software
without going through the platform\'s technical interface, do not create
a user profile\... and therefore do not subscribe to the platform\'s
rules of use. However, some hope that the situation could change. In
fact, the European Digital Services Act, which came into force in August
and aims to regulate the activities of large platforms and search
engines, provides that approved researchers must be able to freely
access their data.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1786

Flames lick the marble floors. A meteor smokes in the middle of the
living room. Nearby, the forest babbles and trickles insistently. Under
the calm water of the pool, we sense that a monster is lurking, ready to
emerge. In a kind of waking dream -- l'invitation, the new digital work
presented at the STUDIOTELUS of the Grand Théâtre de Québec, transports
us to an apocalyptic setting, to the heart of a hypnotic and painful
destruction. To an intense and cosmic soundtrack, we visit a world
without humans, with the slowness of a video inspired by a high-end
furniture store. Luxurious homes burn or are submerged. The series of
tracking shots takes us to a lush, disturbing jungle, then into orbit,
to follow an astronaut who may have fled Earth to find a new habitat.
Signed Philippe-Aubert Gauthier and Tanya St-Pierre, this 75-minute
feature film is a tour de force. It is designed specifically for the
vertical (or even vertiginous, in this case) space bordered on one side
by Jordi Bonet\'s mural and on the other by the balconies of the various
floors that lead to the Louis-Fréchette room. \"I like the idea that
when you go to the theatre, you enter another world. The place
encouraged us to work on something a little more dreamlike than what we
had done recently,\" says Gauthier. DOMESTICATING THE ELEMENTS Exploring
the notion of decor, Tanya St-Pierre drew on decoration magazines from
the 1970s and 1980s to create surprising and mysterious collages.
Several of them scroll across the five porthole screens above the
STUDIOTELUS bar. In addition to lines, patterns, colours and textures,
she was interested in disciplined flames (candles and fireplaces) that
sought to make these rooms warm. The reflection continued with tamed
water (aquariums, ponds and swimming pools) and indoor plants, often
separated from their wild sisters by huge windows, which act as mirrors
in the video. "We can no longer distinguish the outside from the inside,
which feeds a feeling of ambiguity," notes curator Ariane Plante, who
was hypnotized and moved by the proposal. "The slowness, the spaces that
transform, the play of transparency and reflections, the complexity of
the structures, all of this creates liminal worlds, in the in-between."
SOUND GENERATED BY COLOURS "The collages serve to inspire the 3D models,
but are also integrated as a material," explains Tanya St-Pierre. It can
become a drape, a tapestry, a floor, a texture. The aesthetic of
collages becomes a method for building.\" The 150 collages were
digitized, then integrated into existing 3D architectural models, little
piece by little piece, in a tedious assembly work. \"There are virtual
camera movements, like in a video game, which create strolls,\" notes
Gauthier, proud to say that everything was done with free software. All
the images were created when the artist looked at the sound dimension:
\"We selected sounds and instrumentation choices that we liked. It\'s
close to doom jazz, very slowed down, dark, apocalyptic. Then, with a
very simple software that I designed, we extract the color information
from the video. If there is more red or green, it controls the
synthesizers, it changes the timbres.\" All this technical work
ultimately generates intense emotions in spectators who let themselves
be swallowed up by the work. Those who attend Pompières et pyromanes
currently showing at the Trident will find the same sense of urgency
coupled with dazzling tenderness. In a kind of waking dream - the
invitation is presented until February 15, 2024, for free visits on
Saturdays from noon to 5 p.m. and before the shows for ticket
holders.inf:grandtheatre.qc.ca The last Visual Arts column will be
published on December 16. I would like to thank the artists, gallery
owners and curators who opened their world to me. Thank you to Le Soleil
for allowing me to write and sharpen my perspective on this field for
over 12 years, as well as to the readers who were there.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1787

A wind of panic is blowing over the AI Act. Negotiations around the
draft European regulation on artificial intelligence (AI) have been very
tense since MEPs slammed the door on a negotiation meeting with
representatives of the member states on Friday 10 November, reported the
Euractiv agency. The reason for their anger? The elected representatives
had just learned that France and Germany, supported by Italy, were
opposed to a compromise path on "foundation models": the three countries
no longer wished to regulate these artificial intelligence systems that
can create text or images, and which can be used by companies in
applications such as the chatbots ChatGPT or Bard. Disagreements are
frequent in "trilogues" -- the negotiation of a final text between the
European Parliament and the Council of Member States, under the
leadership of the Commission. But this blockage could call into question
the agreement on the text, subject to an urgent timetable. And France\'s
attitude is attracting criticism. According to our information, in an
attempt to find a way out of the crisis, Paris, through the Minister
Delegate for Digital Affairs, Jean-Noël Barrot, will propose applying a
base of minimum transparency obligations to foundation models, such as
publishing a summary of the characteristics of the software as well as
how it works and how it was trained. These rules could be brought
together in a code of conduct adopted by companies. This option was to
be submitted to the other Member States at the next Council meetings, on
Friday 17 and Tuesday 21 November. With this offensive, France, Germany
and Italy are opposing the obligations planned in the spring by
Parliament. The latter called for regular assessments and measures to
mitigate the risks posed by these models for the security and
fundamental rights of the European Union (EU), which would include
combating errors, illegal content, discriminatory bias, etc. These
countries consider these procedures cumbersome and too costly for
European start-ups. They reject the compromise put forward at the
beginning of November, which planned to apply these obligations only to
the most powerful models. To ward off criticism, Paris claims not to be
opposed to regulating AI and believes that the AI Act would already be
the most restrictive text in the world. France argues that foundation
models will be subject to strong obligations if they are used by
companies for "high-risk" uses, which constitute the initial basis of
the AI Act: autonomous driving, exam grading, CV sorting, health
diagnosis, obtaining credit, use in the justice system, etc. "Lobbying"
These arguments may not be enough to ease tensions. "By not regulating
these models, the EU risks wasting a historic opportunity," warned AI
researcher Yoshua Bengio, in an opinion piece for the German media
Tagesspiegel on Wednesday, November 15. \"This last-minute attempt to
exempt the models that constitute the future of AI would make the
European regulation the laughing stock of the world,\" tweeted Max
Tegmark, founder of the Future of Life Institute, the NGO behind the
petition launched in March for a \"pause\" in AI research. France and
Germany are moving in the direction of \"lobbying by American digital
giants and European start-ups, such as the French Mistral or the German
Aleph, to the detriment of European companies and SMEs that will use
their models,\" accuses Mark Brakel, head of public affairs at the
Future of Life Institute. In June, Emmanuel Macron said he \"shared the
concerns\" that the AI Act would threaten innovation, expressed by
Mistral CEO Arthur Mensch and his advisor Cédric O (the president\'s
former Secretary of State for Digital Affairs). Mr. Macron has made the
creation of French AI \"champions\", such as Mistral, LightOn or
HuggingFace, a sovereign priority. Obligations would be costly and would
threaten the open-source ecosystem of free and open publication of
models, which would leave the market to American giants like OpenAI,
Google or Amazon, insists Mr. Mensch. This speech is relayed by the
French AI specialist Yann Le Cun, now research director at the American
Meta (Instagram, Facebook). Can a compromise be found? While she
\"understands\" both sides, MEP Stéphanie Yon-Courtin (Renew) wonders
whether calling on a code of conduct and corporate responsibility \"will
be enough\". In addition, other issues complicate the equation: thus, on
Friday 17, 70 organizations from the creative industries wrote that
\"France\'s position forces \[them\] to react\": they do not want the
obligations that provided for requiring model manufacturers to ensure
\"transparency on the content used for their training\" and subject to
copyright to be removed. Another bone of contention in the negotiations
on the AI Act: the exemptions to be granted to law enforcement for the
use of real-time biometrics... However, time is running out: an
agreement was expected for December 6. Beyond that, there will only be
two or three months left before the European election campaign in June.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1788

While seventeen American writers represented by the Authors Guild,
including Jonathan Franzen and John Grisham, filed a complaint in
September against OpenAI and its conversational agent, ChatGPT, for
copyright infringement, an English team from Imperial College London has
found a way to detect whether a literary or scientific text has been
seen by a language model during its development. As a reminder, a
language model is software that allows a chatbot to respond or interact
with a human in natural language: the conversational robot makes
grammatically correct sentences, adapts its style, creates original
statements, etc. These abilities are obtained by a fairly \"brutal\"
learning method that consists of making it guess the next word in a
sentence taken from a huge corpus of texts, reaching thousands of
billions of \"tokens\" (or semantic subunits, such as syllables,
prefixes, suffixes, etc.). These texts come from web pages, forums,
scientific articles, books and newspaper articles, most likely protected
by copyright. Validated predictions Few actors provide details on this
corpus, including those whose language models are said to be open
source. OpenAI does not communicate this information, Meta did so for
Llama, but not for Llama 2. Google, for Bard, was not more
forthcoming... Despite the lack of transparency, can we read into the
"brain" of these algorithms made up of billions of parameters? Can we
know what they have read or not? The English team answers in the
affirmative. "We were motivated by the idea of making this aspect of
language models less opaque, because what they know comes precisely from
this data," explains Yves-Alexandre de Montjoye, associate professor at
Imperial College. The researchers carried out a so-called \"membership
inference\" attack on a large language model, Llama, from the company
Meta, or more precisely an identical version, OpenLlama, whose training
corpus has been made public - which made it possible to validate the
researchers\' predictions, set out in a preprint (an article not yet
accepted by a scientific journal) submitted on October 23 at a
conference. The researchers first selected their own corpus of books
(38,300) and scientific articles (1.6 million), drawn from the Redpajama
database of the company Hugging Face. Each of these families was divided
into two, into \"possible member of the training corpus\" or
\"non-member\" (because taken at a later date than OpenLlama\'s
training). For each token of these texts, they tested the language model
by studying which word it suggests after a sentence of about 128 tokens
and what probability it assigns to the real word. These gaps between the
model and reality over thousands of sentences make it possible to
construct a sort of signature for each book or article. \"In fact, we
are trying to see if the model is \'surprised\' by a text,\" summarizes
Yves-Alexandre de Montjoye. In a second step, they built a program
capable of classifying a text as a \"member of the training corpus\" or
\"non-member\", by training this program with their results obtained on
the two types of text. These calculations take about a minute per book
of about 100,000 tokens. Possible trials Finally, they can state with
more than 81% certainty whether a book was seen by the language model
during the training phase (and 63% for scientific articles). On October
25, in another preprint, a competing team from the universities of
Washington and Princeton, using Wikipedia texts as a "reference," also
explained that it is possible to read the "minds" of these models and
claimed that GPT-3 has most likely read copyrighted books. "This could
also work for a newspaper article, but it would be better to adapt our
method to such corpora to be more robust," said Yves-Alexandre de
Montjoye, who intends to continue his dive into these black boxes.
"These large language models are fascinating. Beyond the copyright issue
they raise, we must try to understand them. They do not simply copy
paragraphs. What signals in a text are they sensitive to? To context, to
repetitions..." Sam Altman, CEO of OpenAI, said at a conference on
November 6 that his company would pay the costs of any lawsuits brought
against its customers who use paid versions of ChatGPT.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1789

Historically, technological inflection points can be very important in
injecting competition into markets. If there are dominant players, a
completely new technology can make them partially obsolete. But with
artificial intelligence \[AI\], there are already concerns \[that this
is not the case\]. \"This observation was made on November 3 by Lina
Khan, the chair of the Federal Trade Commission (FTC), the American
competition authority. Ms. Khan was responding to the Bloomberg agency,
which asked her about the risk of seeing the stranglehold already
established on digital by Google, Microsoft, Meta (Facebook, Instagram)
and Amazon reproduced in AI. This question was also raised at the summit
on the risks of AI organized by London in early November, although it
initially focused on the possibility of seeing software free itself from
human control, or facilitating the launch of computer and biological
attacks: "We run the risk of seeing the dominance of a handful of
private actors over our economies and institutions further reinforced,"
warned Amba Kak, director of the AI Now Institute, an NGO that studies
the social and ethical implications of AI. The French Minister Delegate
for Digital Affairs, Jean-Noël Barrot, expressed concern about the
"formation of monopolies," while a letter signed by many researchers and
start-up leaders warned against the "concentration of power" in AI.
However, the recent rise of AI has given rise to new actors and leaders,
such as OpenAI, the creator of the chatbot ChatGPT, and Sam Altman, its
38-year-old CEO. But the start-up is already closely linked to
Microsoft, which has invested 11 billion dollars (around 10.3 billion
euros) in it. Co-founder of OpenAI, businessman Elon Musk lamented in
February that this project, designed as a \"counterweight to Google\",
is now \"controlled by Microsoft\". If Mr. Altman sought out this
heavyweight in the cloud - online services for businesses - it was in
order to have access to its enormous computing capacities necessary for
AI: running ChatGPT already cost 700,000 dollars per day in February,
according to the SemiAnalysis website. Another start-up in the AI
sector, Anthropic has just accepted 4 billion dollars of investment from
Amazon and 2 billion from Google. Shareholders of OpenAI and Anthropic,
the two multinationals also market their AI models to their customers.
In addition, Google, Amazon and Meta developed internal AI research very
early on. With high salaries and access to data to train this software,
they attracted many researchers. Two of the three pioneers of modern AI
joined Meta (Yann Le Cun) and Google (Geoffrey Hinton). In 2020, in the
United States, 70% of AI PhD students were hired in the private sector
compared to 20% in 2004, according to the journal Science. Another major
asset of the Internet heavyweights is that they can deploy their AI on
their platforms: the Office suite (Word, PowerPoint, etc.) for
Microsoft, the search engine for Google, the social networks Instagram
and Facebook for Meta... On this point, recent regulations have not put
in place specific safeguards: the European Digital Markets Act prohibits
these companies from favoring their services, but it does not cover
chatbots such as ChatGPT, nor voice assistants from Google, Amazon
(Alexa) or Apple (Siri). \"Open and competitive ecosystem\" Is the
domination of digital giants over AI inevitable? Some think not and see
an alternative solution in open source, these models that can be used
for free and modified. Faced with the latter, \"we have no competitive
advantage, and neither does OpenAI,\" warned a Google engineer in an
internal memo in early May, according to SemiAnalysis. Startups like
Hugging Face or Mistral AI also believe that open source can shake up
the AI sector, as it has established itself in software used for servers
or cybersecurity. However, open source is also defended by a giant like
Meta -- and partially by Google and OpenAI -- and does not necessarily
guarantee competition. One solution would be to develop less gigantic,
generalist and expensive AI models. The White House decree on AI
advocates creating a "fair, open and competitive ecosystem" and
encourages the FTC to act if necessary. Could the antitrust authority
intervene more quickly than in web services, where lawsuits against
Google, Amazon or Meta are only just starting today? Washington, Paris
and Brussels are also launching supercomputers with public funds to help
start-ups and university research, but their capacity remains limited.
France wants to make French-language content available in order to train
French models like those of Mistral AI or LightOn. Will we eventually
see the importation into AI of a criterion of cultural exception, in the
administration or national education? Another avenue: the mobilization
of the concept of sovereignty in sensitive areas such as defense. The
idea is interesting, but it recalls the long debates around digital
sovereignty and the cloud, dominated by American giants.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1790

I read Libé every day. \"And once it\'s done, I feel good!\" Amazing.
Paul, 61, was at the Cité de la Musique on November 11 to attend the 24
hours of Libé, the latest incarnation of the daily\'s 50th anniversary,
where journalists and guests went to meet their readers. Round tables,
debates, show, concerts A constant crowd, braving the cold and rain,
came to question the profession and take an interest in how a newspaper
is made. A non-exhaustive stroll through this Saturday where around
thirty events took place. 9:30 a.m. Paul is not alone. He came with his
daughter Tessa, 26, who wants to go into journalism: \"I\'m more
interested in Al-Jazeera or Courrier international. But I want to know
how news is made at Libé.\" She\'s in the right place. The sound system,
which was playing a cover of Ring of Fire, stops and Dov Alfon, the
recently mustachioed (it suits him well) publication director, calls out
to the editorial board: \"Sartre said that Libé was an ambush in the
jungle of information. We don\'t really know what that means. We\'re
mainly looking for what event will surprise the reader.\" As they do
every morning, the section editors describe what was published that
morning and what is expected for the day. In addition to the
developments in the situation between Israel and Hamas, which are not
very encouraging, we learn that Taiwan\'s military service is going to
be reformed to face a war against China, that Iceland has suffered 500
earthquakes in one day, that at 9:58 the words \"real people\" are
uttered, that with the \"ghost nets\" left at sea we could cover the
Czech Republic and that, if the parrots all worked like fire sirens,
everyone would know about it. \"We have a lot of information and very
little space in the newspaper, that\'s our daily dilemma,\" concludes
Dov Alfon. 10 a.m. Two floors down, a round table is entitled
\"Democracy in Peril.\" The day is also an opportunity to get
prestigious guests, from Jean Paul Gaultier to Wendy Delorme, thinking.
There, it\'s MEP Raphaël Glucksmann who asserts: \"When democracy
becomes natural, we stop feeding it and it disintegrates.\" Then he
continues: \"In Brussels, I signed up for the \"human rights\"
committee. There were only guys like me, we made idealistic speeches and
it led nowhere. So I signed up for the \"trade\" committee. From there,
I defended human rights better.\" In the audience, Anne, who describes
herself as \"very, very old\" (60 years old by the looks of it),
approves each sentence with a resounding \"hum.\" She\'s living her best
ideological life and enjoying the show. Jean Quatremer, our pioneer of
journalistic Europe, deplores the disaffection of the left, which leaves
the field open to the margins: \"The extremists no longer want the end
of the EU, they have understood the interest they derive from it, but
they now want to pervert its values.\" He is contradicted by Lionel
Zinsou, former Prime Minister of Benin (which is not yet part of
Europe): \"On the contrary! The European left is alive. But the values
of Western democracy must be shown in action and everywhere. This would
prevent the countries of the South from being skeptical in particular.\"
Anne, for her part, is categorical: \"I believe in Glucksmann. It is
someone like him who can wake up the left.\" Even trade. 11 a.m. In the
corridors of the Philharmonie, round tables propose varied themes, on
the climate, open source, the use of off or photo illustration.
Unamplified, they force the spectators to listen and get closer to the
speakers. In this atmosphere between the campfire and the journalistic
halls where the loud voices mix, the photo department explains a
conceptual series by Christophe Maout where, to illustrate racism in
football, a ball dripping with white paint was shot; the political
department specifies that the off serves more to find subjects of
context, and the editors of the investigation department assure a
slightly borderline woman that never, ever, were they the ones who put
microphones in her phone to track her down. In the distance, three
security guards watch over a little 2-year-old girl who is playing with
their set of keys. \"Everything is fine, don\'t worry, her mother is not
far away.\" The atmosphere is so warm that even the abandoned children
are not really abandoned. 11:15 a.m. Scattered across the Ile-de-France
region, twelve editors and a lawyer, who are preparing that very evening
to take part in the show Libé s\'la raconte, concocted by our
correspondent in Madrid François Musseau and his sidekick Vanessa
Rousselot, are anxious as they revise their text. Beta-blockers,
antidepressants, Bach flowers, even unexpected sick leave pass from
thought to thought. 11:30 a.m. Willem was unable to come. He finds
himself caricatured having a drink to our health by Coco, the cartoonist
from Libé who succeeded him. She discusses the job of a press cartoonist
with Terreur graphique. Coco, one editorialized cartoon per day: \"We
try to have fun with the not always funny news, to make it explode. With
the management we sometimes have divergent opinions.\"
\"Complementary,\" jokes the moderator. \"In one day,\" Coco continues,
\"the news is so rich that the difficulty is choosing the subject that
will make tomorrow\'s cartoon.\" Terreur graphique, a weekly strip,
whose best day of his life was being hired at Libé: \"I have a more
societal fiber, less in the caricature of politicians than in that of
people. With a tendency towards dialogue.\" Both react to criticism on
the networks with a phlegm of denial: they do not care. Terreur: \"Being
attacked by fascists, I have no problem. When people are of the same
sensitivity as me, it affects me.\" Coco: \"Who has not been insulted at
least once on the networks? I remove myself from these comments. The
important thing is to express myself freely.\" Before describing the
quintessence of journalism: \"Sometimes it works, sometimes not and
tomorrow is another day.\" 1:15 p.m. Two twenty-somethings were asked
what made them come to this packed amphitheater to listen to Serge July.
Answer: \"Well, there\'s no age limit for learning!\" For an hour, July
told them about his newspaper, without nostalgia in his voice, from the
press agency to the influence of Sartre, including the revolutionary
printing process that allowed the newspaper to come out without printing
costs that would otherwise be impossible to sustain. They saw that the
daily newspaper is a ruinous dancer whose paper is expensive. They
traveled through a few stories, from the Berlin Wall to the
Saint-Bernard church, from Le Pen\'s shock to Mitterrand\'s face, from
\"I love you, I don\'t\" before the temporary closure in 1981 to July\'s
portrait on rue Béranger, before leaving Libé in 2006. \"50 years, for
those who created the newspaper, it\'s unimaginable. It\'s very moving
for me. For you too, I imagine. We shared a lot of moments together,
journalists and readers.\" Yes, Serge, for us too, journalists and
readers, it was moving. 3:00 p.m. A source tells us that one of the
groups that was supposed to perform after the show asked for sixty
bottles of Tsingtao beer in the dressing room. Impossible to find any in
the neighborhood. No one knows if the group, in the event that their
order is not respected, will agree to play. Atmosphere. To be continued.
3:30 p.m. Anne Sinclair recounts her misadventures (and her joys) during
her prestigious career in audiovisual and mixed power. \"There are three
stages to the threat to the independence of the press: in the face of
political power, in the face of economic power, and, as is the case
today, in the face of a private shareholder carrying an ideological
project.\" The specter of Bolloré hovers over this debate \"Press and
pressures\", where a former journalist from the JDD also intervenes and
where at 3:47 p.m. the sentence was uttered: \"Libé is in the process of
successfully transforming into digital.\" Samu, friends! 4 p.m. Back in
the corridor of round tables. Two veterans give us a brilliant
performance on how obituary front pages are made. In particular that of
the death of Mao, covered in ideograms, where the team of the time tried
their hand at wordplay in Chinese (\"Long live proletarian cannabis!\").
A skill that has unfortunately been lost. 5 p.m. It\'s not that we
didn\'t go to Isabelle Huppert\'s masterclass, it\'s that we couldn\'t
get in because there were so many people. A witness tells us a salient
fact: \"On the set of Heaven\'s Gate, Godard came to see her to offer
her the role of Sauve qui peut (life). Completely jetlagged when he got
off the plane in Montana, he didn\'t tell her the script and said: \"I
want you to be the face of suffering.\" Or of misfortune, we don\'t know
anymore. We should have gone to this round table on the collection of
testimonies. 6:30 p.m. The audience, still as numerous, benevolent,
surprising, has the joy of witnessing our daily ordeal. The \"headline
meeting\". Many \"faces of suffering\" must resolve three problems: what
subject for the front page, what photo, what title? In the balance that
day: the malaise of the Jews on the eve of the demonstration against
anti-Semitism or an investigation into Hidalgo\'s Tahitigate. The
public, invited to participate, opts for the first subject, despite a
courageous suggestion from a reader: Hidalgo in a photo with a flower
necklace and a snorkel on the title: \"Tahiti, Hidalgo already tuba\"
(for battue, verlan, in reference to the next municipal election). A
pint and three cigarettes later, we are back to witness the validation
of a photo combo with the title \"Un choc intime\" in the center. A
\"chic on time\" was less successful. 7 p.m. \"So I went to the Franprix
on rue Petit where I bought 40 Super Bock beers, with 20 Peroni, and I
added another ten Asahi. I hope they\'ll like it, for the moment I
haven\'t heard from them.\" 8 p.m. The twelve journalists and the lawyer
from Libé are on stage to \"show off.\" That is to say, talking about
their job, talking about the newspaper, talking about themselves,
because they and us, they and you, are pretty much the same thing.
Individuals at work, with opinions, even values, a personality, a bag of
failures to carry and a few victories that make it lighter. They are
everyday like the newspaper and as contemporary as society, whose
malformed beauty could be seen in the twists and turns of their
sentences. They were brilliant in their simplicity and moving in their
sincerity or indignation. We refuse to focus on describing two or three
stories for fear of distorting the others, so much did the strength of
this show also lie in the collective that animated it. But if it is
impossible to recount here what was said on this stage, you will find it
written in filigree in all the other pages of this newspaper that they
create, the place where we deposit our lives and where we drink from
those of others. Out of curiosity, to know what is happening elsewhere
or within us.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1791

London - Special Envoy - Seeing all the players who have participated in
the rise of artificial intelligence \[AI\] over the last ten years
gathered together felt like a historic moment,\" says Mustafa Suleyman,
CEO of the start-up Inflection and co-founder of DeepMind, the AI gem
bought by Google and one of whose first investors was Elon Musk. The
surprise visit to London of the CEO of Tesla and X also contributed to
the success of the \"first international summit on the risks of AI\",
organized on Wednesday 1 and Thursday 2 November by the British Prime
Minister, Rishi Sunak. The joint presence, among the leaders of
twenty-eight countries, of the Vice President of the United States,
Kamala Harris, and Chinese representatives, was seen as another
diplomatic victory for London. In addition to the casting, the setting
-- the sumptuous Victorian mansion of Bletchley Park and its
outbuildings, where Alan Turing\'s team deciphered German codes during
the Second World War -- was also symbolic. Finally, the organization
(informal exchanges and some round tables behind closed doors, in a
building not accessible to journalists) generated \"a very good quality
of exchanges\", admits Antoines Bordes, from the French start-up
Helsing. Despite this positive atmosphere, this unprecedented gathering
also showed the challenge of regulating artificial intelligence, a year
after the emergence of ChatGPT and a family of software capable of
generating stunning images and texts. Among the announcements was the
launch of an \"IPCC of AI\", responsible for forging a scientific
consensus, as its equivalent does for climate change. Indeed, the
writing of a report on the state of AI was entrusted to the Canadian
researcher Yoshua Bengio. The structure is not very clear, however,
because similar initiatives already existed. Mr. Bengio would be joined
by researchers but would remain attached to the Scientific Advisory
Board on AI, created in October by the United Nations. In addition, some
propose adding other structures, inspired either by CERN (European
Council for Nuclear Research) or the IAEA (International Atomic Energy
Agency). Without taking a position, James Manyika, senior vice president
at Google, recognizes the need to establish evaluation \"standards\". A
form of consecration On this subject, Prime Minister Rishi Sunak created
a British AI Safety Institute, which will have the mission of \"testing
and assessing the risks\" of models from AI giants. The institute will
have the advantage of having the cooperation of OpenAI, Meta, AWS or
GoogleDeepmind. And international partnerships, in particular its recent
American counterpart. But these tests will not be backed by a law, Mr.
Sunak considering it premature to legislate. In essence, the British
event was a form of consecration for those who believe that AI is
capable of generating "existential risks" for humanity. This concept was
popularized by the philosopher Nick Bostrom, author of the book
Superintellligence (Dunod, 2017), a figure of the "long-termist"
movements (which aim to act according to the well-being of the billions
of human beings who will live in the future) and transhumanists (which
aspire to improve the fate of man through technology). "I have always
dreamed of organizing an event like this," confided Max Tegmark,
co-founder of the Future of Life Institute, who in March wrote the open
letter calling for a "pause" in AI research. Also present were CEOs such
as Elon Musk and Sam Altman of OpenAI, the creator of ChatGPT, who also
believe in the danger of superintelligence comparable to pandemics or
nuclear risks. To avoid this, they advocate creating a version that is
beneficial to humanity. The final statement mentions "the potential for
serious or even catastrophic harm caused by AI, whether intentionally or
unintentionally." Among the risks cited are the loss of control of
software or its use by malicious actors to create cyberattacks or
biological weapons. At the same time, King Charles III, like the British
Minister of Technology, Michelle Donelan, has been enthusiastic about
the prospect of AI helping to create "a world without disease" or "an
unlimited source of clean energy," thanks to a technology as important
as "electricity" or even "fire." However, this focus, centered on the
most powerful models (dubbed "Frontier AI") and the most extreme risks,
has been contested. "The regulation of AI must not be conducted on the
basis of speculative discourse about 'existential threats' to the
detriment of the people who are currently suffering the impacts of AI
software," warned the NGO Amnesty International in a statement,
protesting against the use of algorithms to detect welfare fraud, which
has led to errors and a scandal in the Netherlands. Some see alarmist
discourse as a diversion of attention from other more immediate
problems, such as errors, discriminatory bias, respect for copyright or
the impact on employment. At the summit, this discourse was relayed by
Kamala Harris -- who considered these risks "existential for those who
experience them" -- or by Jean-Noël Barrot, the French Minister Delegate
for Digital Affairs. Both praised the broad spectrum of threats covered
by the draft European AI Act regulation and by the decree signed on
Monday, October 30 by the White House. Aware of the criticism, the
United Kingdom mentioned these dangers in the final declaration.
\"Transparency\" In the round tables, the focus on the most distant
risks was also attacked from another angle. \"Apocalyptic reasoning is
absurd\" and can only lead to measures that will threaten the
open-source publication of AI models, accused Yann Le Cun, the research
director at Meta (Instagram, Facebook), on X. Indeed, some, including
Connor Leahy, from the English start-up Conjecture, argued \"that we
would not publish the plans for a nuclear bomb in open access\". \"If we
limit open source, it will consolidate the domination of three or four
large American companies\", retorted Arthur Mensch, CEO of the young
French start-up Mistral AI, which, like Meta -- but not OpenAI or Google
-- publishes its AI models in open access. He was not convinced by the
demonstrations of participants tending to prove that it was easier to
prepare a cyberattack or a biological weapon using an assistant like
ChatGPT than by searching on Google. This front was supported by an open
letter from the Mozilla Foundation, a supporter of open source, but also
by Mr. Barrot, anxious \"not to disqualify open source, which promotes
transparency and competition, to avoid the creation of monopolies\". As
this thorny debate illustrates, despite a spectacular rise in
discussions on regulation, the States have not yet managed to agree on
where to place the cursor. Each, like the United Kingdom, also wants to
have cutting-edge companies. \"We must regulate before innovating\",
insists the French side, in order to obtain, in the AI Act, the
exclusion of \"foundation models\" (which companies can use to create
services) such as those of Meta and Mistral AI, or OpenAI. This question
should be decided in Brussels by the end of 2023. And before the next
edition of the summit on the risks of AI... organized in a year in
Paris.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1792

Frustrated that he couldn\'t keep playing his video game, 10-year-old
Sylvain Perron went to the library to get some books on programming.
Twenty years later, his company has customers from all over the world,
including Tesla. 92\'never stopped being interested:\' \'& 22\' many
acquaintances. \"Google came out with an article that 2 &2&2E 2&2&22
when I was a kid. So I abanE:\'EE& 2join Protorisk Limited, a & THE
BIRTH OF BOTPRESS kijn\'22 & 9E \' of our customers on our software,
2:\'EE& He wondered how to 2&2question, he decided to build it.
\'conversational &Perron saw an opportunity 2 2\'&9 our customers in
open source. Little \'nii&2that we really saw that it was &: \'\'\'2
&COVID, the company worked with the Quebec government questions from
Quebecers about this new disease. 222\' \'& Name:Sylvain Perron, 32
years old, Degree:Unfinished bachelor\'s degree in software engineering
Company:\'2 le conversationnel Number of employees:About thirty,
including one Its model:\'9\': \> Five questions in quick succession \>
Your greatest achievement? The latest version of the software &\'jii•&
\'has been released. This new version & \> The best advice received?
Never automate anything 2 before. It\'s advice 2& \> Your passions
outside of work? 2\'&if I had billions in my \'& \> Are you afraid of
failure? \'&2 cancer in 2014, I was 23 years old. 22ri&E ment, I
survived. Anxiety and 2& \>Where do you see yourself in five years? 2 in
Quebec and very well known in the field of 2 &

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1793

One hundred and fifty days after the launch of the Ukrainian
counter-offensive in the south of the country, Western military and
analysts are making the same bitter observation: kyiv\'s army has made
very little progress and, above all, is no longer advancing. \"Despite
the determined efforts of the Ukrainian armed forces, five months of
offensive operations have not succeeded in breaking through the Russian
defense lines,\" observes Jack Watling, a researcher at the British
think tank Royal United Services Institute (RUSI), in a note published
on October 19. \"Ukraine retains certain options to make the Russian
position uncomfortable, but it is very unlikely that there will be a
breakthrough (\...) this year,\" adds this specialist in land combat,
who is counting on the conflict continuing in 2024, or even beyond. When
it launched its first assaults on the Russian lines on June 4, the
Ukrainian army nevertheless had high hopes for its operation. Throughout
the spring, it had accumulated men and equipment to break through the
defenses erected by the enemy along the approximately 1,000 kilometers
of the front line. Twelve brigades, comprising approximately 35,000
soldiers, had been specially formed for the maneuver, some of which were
equipped with modern Western armor: British Challenger 2 and German
Leopard 2 tanks, American Bradley infantry fighting vehicles, French
AMX-10 RC reconnaissance vehicles, etc. kyiv\'s objective, then, was to
break through the Russian defensive system erected between the cities of
Zaporizhia and Donetsk, in the south of the country, to try to reach the
Sea of Azov, at the level of the agglomerations of Melitopol, Berdiansk
or Mariupol. Such a maneuver would have allowed the Ukrainians to cut
the Russian army in two, isolating in particular its forces deployed
furthest west, on the left bank of the Dnieper River. Above all, it
would have made it possible to break the land bridge that connects
Russia to the Crimean peninsula, which Moscow uses to supply men and
equipment to all of its forces present in the south of the country.
Quality of the Russian defense line Alas, despite countless attempts to
pierce the Russian defensive curtain, the Ukrainian army is marking
time. At the height of its push on the southern front this summer, it
would have advanced only 90 meters per day on average, assures the
American think tank Center for Strategic and International Studies
(CSIS), in a summary published on October 12. \"The twelve brigades
mobilized by the Ukrainians for their counter-offensive have been partly
consumed, and their soldiers are still blocked on the first Russian
defense line,\" confirms a French military source, not very optimistic
about the Ukrainian capacity to cross the enemy trenches. In five
months, the Ukrainians have only recaptured about 400 square kilometers
of their territory, an area smaller than that of the Territoire de
Belfort, according to specialists at OSINT (Open Source Intelligence).
In total, the Russians still occupy a little over 17% of Ukraine, or
more than 100,000 square kilometers, compared to about a quarter at the
height of their advance in March 2022. In recent days, it is even the
Russian army that has regained the initiative, launching large-scale
assaults, without interruption, since October 10, on the city of
Avdiivka, in Donbass, which the two belligerents have been fighting over
since 2014. The industrial city, which had more than 30,000 inhabitants
before the invasion of February 2022 and in which some 2,000 civilians
are now hiding, is now suffering the fate of Bakhmut. The advance of
Moscow\'s tanks and troops would nevertheless come at the cost of heavy
losses. According to the military and analysts, the laborious nature of
the Ukrainian advance can be explained first by the quality of the
defensive line erected by Moscow, which came as a surprise. During the
spring, the Russian military dug hundreds of kilometers of trenches,
laid tens of thousands of anti-tank and anti-personnel mines, and
covered the fields with dragon\'s teeth (concrete cones designed to
hinder the advance of tanks). Not only were these devices set up along
the entire front, but also in depth, in areas that could be up to 500
meters long, according to the CSIS. \"The Russian defense is
extraordinary,\" admits a senior French officer. This fortification of
the combat line was thought of in the fall of 2022 by General Sergei
Surovikin, who then commanded Moscow\'s troops in Ukraine - he has since
been removed. \"We didn\'t see it at the time, but Surovikin did what
the Germans did in 1917 with Operation Alberich: he voluntarily withdrew
his troops from Kherson and the right bank of the Dnieper to shorten the
front line and strengthen his defensive position, a position that
corresponds to Russian strategic culture. (...) The Ukrainians are not
getting through,\" explains the French Army Command Doctrine and
Training Center, where a unit is monitoring the conflict\'s progress on
a daily basis. At the start of its counter-offensive, the Ukrainian army
did try to carry out large-scale assaults, involving a significant
number of men and equipment, but it had to quickly scale back its
ambitions, due to its lack of sufficient mastery of combined arms
combat. \"Building a brigade capable of carrying out such a maneuver
requires at least nine months of collective training, which the
Ukrainians did not have. After the initial failures, they preferred to
fight much smaller battles, which limits their losses and hardens their
troops, but also produces fewer territorial effects,\" notes Stéphane
Audrand, international risk consultant and reserve officer. Unable to
force their adversary back, the two belligerents have engaged in a war
of attrition, where each tries to inflict the most damage on the other
in the hope of regaining the initiative first. A strategy that is not
without risk for Ukraine. According to Western intelligence services,
Moscow has greater \"strategic depth\" than its adversary. With a
population of 143 million and a growing defense industry, Russia can
mobilize more men and equipment over time than Ukraine and its 43
million citizens, despite the sanctions put in place by the West against
Moscow. \"Ukraine is losing a lot of men\" Many experts fear that
Ukraine will run out of ammunition in 2024, especially 155 mm shells,
the NATO standard caliber used for artillery of Western origin, due to a
lack of supplies from allied countries and sufficient domestic
production. \"Although there are signs of progress towards resolving
Ukraine\'s ammunition supply problems, it will take several months
before major progress is made. (...) It is therefore unlikely that the
projected production will meet Ukraine\'s needs before the second half
of 2024 or early 2025,\" predicts Mykola Bielieskov, a researcher at the
National Institute for Strategic Studies (NISS) in kyiv. Conversely,
Russia still has around 4 million artillery shells in its arsenals.
"This means that it could continue to fire at the current relatively low
rate of 10,000 rounds per day for a little over a year," Colonel Ants
Kiviselg, head of Estonian military intelligence, estimated at a press
conference on October 20. Not to mention the shells sent to Russia by
North Korea, estimated at between 300,000 and 350,000 units, and those
newly manufactured by Russian industry, whose capacity is said to have
increased to two to three million per year. In terms of cruise missiles,
Russia is also said to have returned to its pre-war level, with 100 new
projectiles manufactured per month, compared to 40 a year ago, says Jack
Watling (RUSI). "Unlike Ukraine, Russia is unlikely to face serious
shortages of ammunition in 2024. Vladimir Putin has already been trying
for more than a year to put much of the Russian economy on a war
footing." Even though this process is far from perfect, it is producing
results,\" worries Mykola Bielieskov (NISS). \"The year 2024 will be one
of great danger for the Ukrainians. The equipment that has already been
delivered to them will be worn out, but they will only be able to
partially rebuild it because Western production capacities will not be
optimal until 2025,\" adds Mr. Audrand. The other concern is kyiv\'s
ability to regenerate its troops. The state of Ukrainian losses is the
best-kept secret of the war - even the allies do not know it - but the
number of its soldiers killed or wounded is estimated to be over 200,000
in Western capitals. Between 20,000 and 50,000 soldiers are said to have
had amputations after being wounded. "Ukraine is losing a lot of men,
especially among its veterans, and will have more and more difficulty
rebuilding its brigades," fears a French officer who regularly travels
back and forth to kyiv. Even though it has lost more personnel --
between 390,000 and 480,000 killed and wounded, according to the British
Ministry of Defense -- Russia has a larger reserve. While waiting for a
possible resumption of maneuvers by one of the belligerents in 2024,
after the episodes of "rasputitsa" (autumn rains and spring thaw), which
make maneuvers difficult, the winter looks set to be difficult for kyiv.
At the same time, in 2022, the Russians deliberately targeted civilian
energy infrastructure to break the morale of the Ukrainians. However,
everything suggests that Moscow will adopt the same strategy in the
coming months, with tenfold increase in resources. \"The Russians are
currently firing fewer drones and missiles than their production
capacity allows them to. This probably means that they are building up
reserves to strike hard at Ukrainian water and energy infrastructure
this winter,\" fears Stéphane Audrand. In this regard, the anti-aircraft
defense means provided by the West will be crucial.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1794

OpenAI, Google, Microsoft and Meta are not the only ones to have
launched a race to play the leading roles in artificial intelligence
(AI). Political leaders are also competing in initiatives to supervise
-- and promote -- these software programs capable of performing human
tasks, such as the text or image generators ChatGPT or Midjourney. On
Tuesday, October 24, the European Union hopes to find a political
agreement on the Artificial Intelligence Act (AI Act) or, at least,
compromises on the main part of this draft regulation. Then, on November
1 and 2, the British Prime Minister, Rishi Sunak, will welcome
representatives of foreign states and tech giants to London for an
"international summit on AI safety". Later in November, the G7 countries
will meet for a meeting of the "Hiroshima process", a discussion on AI
launched in Japan in May. This convergence illustrates a sense of
political urgency to seize a technology deemed both very promising and
worrying. But in this frenzy -- the United States, the OECD and China
are also active -- strategies differ. Divergences between approaches In
2021, Brussels launched the first major legislative project on AI in the
world: the AI Act prohibits certain uses ("social rating" systems,
"subliminal" manipulation techniques, etc.) and, for uses deemed "high
risk" (autonomous driving, sorting resumes, granting bank loans, etc.),
imposes obligations, such as minimizing the error rate and
discriminatory biases, verifying the quality of training data, etc. On
the controversial point of "general purpose" AI models (such as those
generating texts or images), the compromise path between the European
Parliament and the Member States consists of imposing obligations on the
most important models (beyond a threshold of computing used for
training, or a number of users or client companies in the EU, according
to a document cited by Contexte). Software manufacturers should also
ensure that they have taken measures to respect the "copyright" of the
content used for training. London, which wants to become an AI capital,
has chosen to focus on the risks deemed to be the most existential:
these are linked to "intentional harmful use" -- to generate computer
attacks or biological weapons -- or to a "problem of control of an AI"
that could escape humans, we read in a draft of a joint declaration from
the summit, mentioned by Euractiv. The message is reminiscent of
alarmist letters calling for AI to be "paused" or deemed as dangerous as
"pandemics or nuclear war." The British approach also echoes the
rhetoric of industry giants: the summit is focusing on "frontier AI
models," the term used by OpenAI, Google, Microsoft, and Anthropic when
they created a trade association of the most powerful software makers in
June. London is also aiming to create a kind of "IPCC of AI," a panel of
experts inspired by the one tasked with informing governments about
climate change---an idea also championed by several AI executives in an
op-ed in the Financial Times. Maintaining innovation The approach of the
\"code of conduct\", discussed at the G7, or the \"voluntary
commitments\", accepted under the aegis of Washington by the giants of
the sector in June, follows a middle path: non-binding, like that of
London, but generalist, like that of Brussels (the European and American
texts also require that content generated by AI be made detectable). Are
all these strategies complementary or do they interfere with each other?
In any case, French leaders (at least the Minister for Digital Affairs,
Jean-Noël Barrot) and European leaders (Commissioner Vera Jourova, and
even the President of the Commission, Ursula Von der Leyen) have decided
to go to London, judging the approach on extreme risks to be
complementary to that of the AI Act. Others have a more critical view:
while he does not see a \"contradiction\" between the British initiative
and the AI Act, MEP (Renew) Dragos Tudorache believes that \"voluntary
commitments are not enough, as we have seen with social networks\".
\"Large companies have an interest in focusing the conversation on the
existential and distant risks of AI, because it allows them to divert
attention from more down-to-earth and immediate problems\", adds the
co-rapporteur of the AI Act. The debate on the regulation of
general-purpose AI models also affects the AI Act: the digital business
lobby Numeum -- as well as President Emmanuel Macron or the French
start-up Mistral AI -- has highlighted the risk of creating a
\"dangerous straitjacket for innovation\", while Adrienne Williams, from
DAIR, an NGO researching AI ethics, regrets that the European
Parliament\'s version, which imposed stricter rules on models of all
sizes, has been \"diluted\". For Meta\'s research director Yann LeCun,
focusing the debate on the dangers posed to national security by future
\"superintelligences\" produced by large companies would also threaten
open innovation and the publication of models in open access \"open
source\", dear to Meta or the start-up Hugging Face. \"The debate on
existential risks is premature, as long as we do not have a system that
approaches the intelligence of a simple cat,\" Mr. LeCun believes in the
FT.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1795

\"Libé\" is relocating its editorial staff and producing the newspaper
live: from the morning conference to the creation of the front page,
including the live updating of the site. And throughout the day, round
tables and meetings with all departments, where we will talk about
investigation, press independence, the digital revolution,
off-the-record practice, photos or fact-checking\... 9 a.m. Public
reception. 9:30 a.m. - 10:30 a.m. Editorial conference Live and in
public. You will be able to discuss the themes that will be covered
throughout the day on the Libération website and the choice of subjects
for the pages of the next paper issue. ?Conference hosted by Dov Alfon,
director of Libération. (La rue musicale-grande scène) 10:30 a.m. -
11:30 a.m. What future for open source investigation? ?Meeting (in
English) hosted by Alexandre Horn, journalist at Checknews, with Lucy
Swinner, journalist at Bellingcat and Poline Tchoubar, open source
journalist at the Capa agency. (La rue musicale) 10:30 - 11:30 Good
news: is there a journalism of solutions? ?Meeting with Fabrice Drouzy,
deputy editor-in-chief of the Supplements service, Maïté Darnault,
correspondent for Libération in Lyon and Gilles Vanderpooten, director
of Reporters d\'espoirs. (La rue musicale) 10:30 - 11:30 Reporter
profession: the new challenges of the journalist ?Round table with
Ariane Lavrilleux, journalist at Disclose, Christophe Deloire, general
director of Reporters without borders, Isabelle Thirion, from the
Audiens group, Amandine Bascoul-Romeu, general director of Libération,
Paul Quinio, deputy editorial director of Libération. (La rue
musicale-grande scène) 10:30 a.m. - 11:30 a.m. Write yourself! Libé\'s
\"Ideas\" pages are an essential space for debate on the left. Today,
it\'s your turn: come and meet our columnists, who will tell you how
they choose their subjects and write their texts. Take up the pen on a
theme that is close to your heart, write a committed post, choose a Libé
title and you might be published! ?Meeting with the Ideas department in
the presence of the author Tania de Montaigne (photo opposite). (La rue
musicale) 10:30 a.m. - 11:30 a.m. How to talk about climate without
despairing? ?Meeting with the Environment department. (La rue musicale)
11:30 a.m.-12:30 p.m. Press cartoons: delicious \"Finding bullshit keeps
me awake,\" Willem told Libé in 2021 to celebrate his 40-year career.
Sometimes to make people laugh, sometimes to denounce, sometimes simply
to comment on current events, press cartoons have been livening up our
pages since 1973. For fifty years, big names like Willem, Coco, Siné,
Cabu, Vuillemin have cast their acerbic, sometimes provocative gaze on
political life, wars and even morals. For everyone, the same questions
come up: how to draw atrocity? How to caricature freely? Round table
with Coco, cartoonist, Willem, cartoonist Terreur graphique, cartoonist
Nicolas Valoteau, artistic director of Libération. Meeting hosted by
Jonathan Bouchet-Petersen, columnist at Libération. (La rue
musicale-grande scène) 12:00 - 1:00 p.m. Investigative journalism or
investigative journalism? ?Meeting with Willy Le Devin, Marie Piquemal
and Guillaume Gendron, journalists in the Investigations department. (La
rue musicale) 12:00 - 1:00 p.m. The \"off\", no secret between us Ah,
the \"off\" This practice of hiding the name of an interlocutor behind a
quote is the subject of many fantasies. Collusion journalism? Necessary
respect for sources? Whether with ministers, bosses and even the
President of the Republic (or their entourage), you will know how to use
an \"off\" and when it is necessary to \"grill\" it. ?Meeting with
Lilian Alemagna and Dominique Albertini, deputy editor-in-chief and head
of the France department. (La rue musicale) 12:00 - 1:00 p.m. In the eye
of Libération: the concept photo at Libération? Meeting with Laure
Troussière and Nathalie Marchetti from the Photo department, with
Christophe Maout, photographer. (La rue musicale) 12:00 - 1:00 p.m.
Ukraine, Middle East: when war invites itself into our daily lives
Meeting with Sonia Delesalle-Stolper, Veronika Dorman and Benjamin
Delille, heads of the World department. (La rue musicale) 2:00 - 3:00
p.m. Facing the extreme right: where to lead the cultural battle? Round
table with Laurent Joffrin, former director of Libération, Aurélie
Filippetti, former Minister of Culture, director of cultural affairs in
Paris, Renaud Dély, host of 28 minutes on Arte and editorial writer at
France Info, Dominique Albertini, head of the France department. Meeting
hosted by Thomas Legrand, editorial writer at Libération. (La rue
musicale-grande scène) 2:00 p.m. - 3:00 p.m. The life of the book Each
week, Libé devotes twelve pages to literary news. French and foreign
novels, philosophy, history, but also poetry, science fiction,
children\'s albums, thrillers\... The Books department welcomes
publishers to talk about independence, curiosity and transmission: how
to choose the texts that we publish and those that we review in the
newspaper? ?Meeting hosted by Frédérique Roussel, head of the Books
department, with the editor Sabine Wespieser and Frédéric Martin
(éditions le Tripode). (Bookstore) 2:30 p.m. - 3:30 p.m. Headlining at
Libé: the hidden side of the \"front page\" \"Poster\" front pages, pun
titles, constantly renewed layout, winks at the reader For fifty years,
Libé has tried to present and highlight information in a different way.
Come and chat with the heads of the Edition department (Libé\'s
\"headliners\") and the newspaper\'s artistic directors (its directors)
and discover, through anecdotes and iconic front pages, how, every day,
they work to offer you a newspaper and a site that stand out and
surprise you. ?Meeting with Caroline Vigent and Jérôme Balazard, heads
of the Edition department, Nicolas Valoteau, artistic director and
Lionel Charrier, head of the Photo department. (La rue musicale) 2:30
p.m. - 3:30 p.m. Portraits de der: the secrets of a cult page ?Meeting
with Luc Le Vaillant and Quentin Girard, heads of the Portraits
department, and Marie Rouge, photographer. (La rue musicale) 2:30 p.m. -
3:30 p.m. Fact-checking: CheckNews or journalism on demand ?Meeting with
Cédric Mathiot, head of the CheckNews department. (La rue musicale) 2:30
p.m. - 3:30 p.m. Culture: exception or not? ?Meeting with Didier Péron,
deputy editor-in-chief, Olivier Lamm, department head, and Sandra Onana,
deputy department head in the Culture department. (La rue musicale) 3:00
p.m. - 4:00 p.m. Reading performance with Lisette Lombé Poet Lisette
Lombé writes as she slams: in breaths, in rhythms, in assonances, in
alliterations. Her texts speak to us of desires, anger, sisterhood and
transmission. ?Meeting and performance hosted by Thomas Stélandre,
deputy head of the Books department. (Bookstore) 3:30 p.m. - 4:30 p.m.
Media: Independence under the microscope? Round table with Daniel
Schneidermann, journalist, founder of Arrêt sur images, Denis Olivennes,
president of the holding company that owns Libération, Anne Sinclair,
journalist, founder of HuffPost France (photo above), Emmanuelle Souffi,
former editor-in-chief of the Journal du dimanche. (La rue
musicale-grande scène) 4 p.m. - 5 p.m. 50 years of archives: diving into
collector\'s issues? Meeting with Bénédicte Dumont and Claudine Mamy,
archivists and documentalists at Libération, with Marie Leroch from the
BNF. (La rue musicale) 4 p.m. - 5 p.m. High-tech: how to improve the
reader experience? Meeting with Adèle Bacos, director of the
Marketing-Subscriptions department and Florian Desloires, director of
the Product-Web Innovation department. (La rue musicale) 4 p.m. - 5 p.m.
\"He\'s a guy, he dies\"? Meeting with Stéphanie Aubert, deputy editor,
and Michel Becquembois, head of obituaries. (La rue musicale) 4 p.m. - 5
p.m. Bearing witness: how to collect the words of the most vulnerable?
Women victims of domestic violence, exiles with traumatic migration
journeys, citizens victims of police violence\... What relationship of
trust is necessary to establish to obtain these testimonies? What
distance between a journalist and his sources? ? Meeting with Virginie
Ballet, Ismaël Halissat and Gurvan Kristanadjaja, journalists in the
Society department. (La rue musicale) 4 p.m. - 5 p.m. \"Pépites\", a
live podcast In her novels, Hélène Frappat twists stories, balancing
them between fiction and reality, between what is visible and invisible.
There are long philosophical journeys, feminism and a lot of cinema. For
a special episode of the Pépites podcast recorded in public, journalist
Sébastien Thème explores with her her way of working, approaching
writing and constructing her stories. ?Pépites, the new cultural podcast
from Louie Media, every Monday, with those who make the culture of
tomorrow. (Bookstore) 5 p.m. - 6 p.m. Platforms: the new news? Platforms
like Twitch, TikTok, YouTube are today the main sources of information
for 15-25 year olds. Acceleration, sensationalism, information fatigue,
innovative formats New uses are shaking up the traditional models on
which the media are based. How can we talk about social issues
differently to address all audiences? How can we prioritize information
in a very horizontal universe? How can we coexist with content creators?
What tone should we use? How can we understand the incarnation imposed
by these new media? Finally, how can we converse with our readers?
?Round table with Domingo, streamer, Johan Hufnagel, co-founder of
Loopsider. Meeting hosted by Lauren Provost, deputy editorial director.
(La rue musicale-grande scène) 5:30 p.m. - 6:30 p.m. Hostage, meeting
with Olivier Dubois Finally! After 711 days of captivity in the Sahel,
Olivier Dubois (photo below), correspondent for Libération, Le Point and
Jeune Afrique in Mali, was released on March 20. What were the
conditions of his detention? How did he hold out? What was his daily
life like? How did the mobilization of the authorities, his friends, his
relatives and the profession allow his release? What really happened in
Gao on the day of his kidnapping? What was the role of the authorities
and the French army? He looks back on his captivity and explains to us
how to be a free man again. ?Meeting with Olivier Dubois, hosted by
Sonia Delesalle-Stolper and Célian Macé, deputy editor-in-chief and
reporter in the World department. (La rue musicale) 5:30 p.m. - 6:30
p.m. Breaking news! How does the newsroom get going when unpredictable
information breaks? Based on three different cases (the explosion on rue
Saint-Jacques, the death of Nahel and the announcement of the death of
Prigojine), dive into the News department. Sending a reporter,
coordinating with the department concerned, verifying the information,
cross-checking sources, sending a push, successive updates. We tell you
everything about the hot news circuit. ? Meeting with Laure Bretton,
editor-in-chief in the News department, and Mickaël Frison, head of
Social Networks. (La rue musicale) 5:30 p.m. - 6:30 p.m. Lifestyle: life
in fashion Gastronomy, design, beauty, new technologies, parenting, love
life and sex life\... How can we tell the story of the world to come
without falling into consumerist clichés? How can we give voice to those
who are shaking things up? Ultimately, isn\'t telling the story of
lifestyles (a little) political? ?Meeting with journalists from the
Lifestyles department. (La rue musicale) 5:30 p.m. - 6:30 p.m. How can
we cover major terrorist trials? ?Meeting with Juliette Delage and Chloé
Pilorget-Rezzouk, journalists from the Society department. (La rue
musicale) 6:30 p.m. - 7:30 p.m. The \"front page\" live and in public?
Journalists, editor-in-chief and artistic director discuss, in public,
the choice of image and headlines for the front page. A unique and
original experience. (La rue musicale-grande scène).

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1796

Both have long been interested in digital commons, these citizen
resources, co-produced and open. Valérie Peugeot, researcher in digital
social sciences and member of the college of the National Commission for
Information Technology and Liberties (CNIL), has made it a subject of
study. Henri Verdier, France\'s ambassador for digital after having been
interministerial director of digital, has placed the logic of the
commons at the heart of the French strategy for innovation and
sovereignty in this field. With the acceleration of developments in
artificial intelligence (AI), we are seeing a renewed interest in the
idea of digital commons. How can this be explained? Henri Verdier:
Generative artificial intelligence systems are revolutionizing our
societies and economies. This acceleration risks leading to an even more
monopolistic world than it is today, because these systems require great
computing power and gigantic databases to train them. The scenario where
only American or Chinese giants would have control over these
technologies is a deterrent to which the commons can provide an answer.
The States of the European Union are becoming aware of the need, in
order to maintain sovereignty of innovation, to create open and shared
infrastructures. Many initiatives are being launched. If we do not set
up these accessible infrastructures with shared governance, we risk
living in a world where we will have to ask Elon Musk for permission to
innovate. Valérie Peugeot: France\'s call for digital AI commons is an
excellent initiative, which must be encouraged. We need shared databases
and algorithms, for reasons of sovereignty and also to align AI
technologies with our European values. I am more circumspect about using
the notion of \"commons\" to describe these infrastructures. We tend to
confuse it with the common good, although they are two different
notions. The common good is a conception of the general interest that is
more or less shared in a society. The \"commons\", for their part, are
defined by three pillars: there must be a shared resource - material or
immaterial - managed by a community - local, in the case of a shared
garden, or globalized and deterritorialized, like the one that manages
the free software Linux -, which defines governance rules to protect the
resource and distribute usage rights. However, in calls for projects for
AI commons, the State places an order for a resource that is not
supported by a collective, and of which we do not really know under
which license it will be shared, nor with what distribution of usage
rights. All this remains very vague. Can you remind us of the origin of
digital commons? HV: Historically, commons were natural resources -
fields, forests, ponds - shared and protected by communities. With the
development of private property, commons gradually disappeared. But, at
the end of the 20th century, the researcher Elinor Ostrom \[1933-2012\]
studied those that remained, and demonstrated the effectiveness of this
mode of cooperation for the preservation of resources. She received the
equivalent of the Nobel Prize in economics in 2009 for this work. VP:
With mass digitization came new commons, immaterial this time, such as
computer code or shared data. Standards and protocols -- www, http://,
etc. -- are commons at the very heart of the history of the Web and the
Internet. It is thanks to their open nature that websites and digital
services have multiplied since the mid-1990s in record time. Today, the
most emblematic examples of knowledge commons are, of course, the
Wikipedia encyclopedia, cartographic data, such as OpenStreetMap, or
nutritional data from Open Food Facts, which are open and managed by
communities of contributors. Can digital commons survive in a neoliberal
market economy? What could their economic model be? VP: There is no
ideal economic model for the commons, but many different models. Some
have chosen the market, and charge for their services. Others operate on
the basis of donations, with the limits of this mode of organization:
not all users of software or a database give, far from it, too
accustomed to the false gratuity of the Web. Still others find mixed,
more sustainable modes of financing. HV: There is no fundamental
contradiction between the commons and the market. The economy benefits
greatly from public infrastructures and free software. But we must
remember that digital commons are essential and fragile, as is,
moreover, the model of a free and open Internet. It is quite possible
that the latter will disappear and that our grandchildren will not know
it. It is urgent to defend it. Companies, for their part, have a role to
play in preserving the digital commons, which are essential to them.
Some do so by contributing to the maintenance of essential tools such as
Linux software. Others realize a little late in the day the value of a
digital commons at a time when it is at risk of disappearing. We
remember Log4J \[a library used by the Java programming language\], used
by the entire global industry. When a security flaw was highlighted in
2021, companies panicked and discovered that their business model
depended on two young Canadian developers who were operating the system
alone. This example shows that the responsibility of companies and
states is engaged: it is shocking to have let these two developers
voluntarily manage a valuable tool without any financial assistance or
cybersecurity expertise. What role can the state play in supporting and
accompanying these digital commons? VP: Swiss researchers showed in 2012
that there are four types of relationships between public authorities
and the commons: confrontation, instrumentalization, mediation and
infusion. The first two are still common, unfortunately, in a logic
where it is difficult to think beyond the public property-private
property divide. Over time, however, we are seeing more and more
initiatives emerge that fall under mediation and infusion, and which I
call \"public-commons partnerships\". The State can first be a financier
of the commons, for example when a community makes premises or an
employee available to a third place that creates shared resources. It
can also be a legal facilitator, or even a protector of the commons. In
2001, the government created the status of collective interest
cooperative societies, SCICs, which have been seized by digital commons
such as Mobicoop, a site that offers commission-free carpooling
solutions. The State can also integrate the commons into public
procurement, for example when it chooses free software for its
administrations or for the world of education, rather than introducing
Microsoft. Finally, public authorities can participate in the design of
commons, as when the Ministry of National Education develops a version
of BigBlueButton, the equivalent of the Zoom videoconferencing tool, but
in open source software. HV: States have an important role to play in
supporting and accompanying digital commons. They can also sometimes
encourage the creation of commons themselves, as France did with
OpenFisca, a tool that makes it easier for citizens to simulate taxes,
or Open Terms Archive, which allows them to monitor changes in the
conditions of use of online services. In this case, a State must learn
to work on an equal footing with other actors, such as civil society,
but it is possible. Under the French presidency of the European Union,
in the first half of 2022, nineteen States, including France, co-signed
a report on commons in the service of sovereignty and called on the
Commission to launch a European foundation on commons. Dozens of
representatives of commons were heard. They testified that they needed
this financial support, but also support for software maintenance and
servers, assistance in the jungle of public aid, a specific \"lawyer\"
within the administration itself to defend them, and a commitment from
institutions to use them, or even contribute. In France, public
authorities have not always supported digital commons. During the
Covid-19 pandemic, third places were called to order because they had
manufactured respirators and visors using plans under Creative Commons
license. What is your analysis of this period? VP: This episode left its
mark. Fab lab stakeholders experienced it as a way for the State to
regain control, after a period of crisis where the citizen commons that
are third places and fab labs compensated for the State\'s failures. I
remain convinced that the episode was rather positive, despite
everything, because it allowed us to move forward and show the power and
effectiveness of the commons in times of crisis. It also helped to
loosen the intellectual stranglehold that, since the 18th century, has
locked us into binary thinking, with the market on one side, which has
drifted towards extreme capitalism, and public power on the other. The
commons can fertilize both the market and public services by encouraging
them to work differently and together, in dialogue with citizen
initiatives, and, in doing so, promote local democracy. The relevance of
the commons is to help us change our perspective and show us that we can
build society differently. HV: The Covid-19 crisis has undoubtedly
shown, unfortunately, that opening up public action had not yet become
enough of a part of our customs to withstand times of crisis. Civil
society mobilized, of course, but did not immediately find solutions to
apply on a large scale. As for the public authorities, they adopted a
fairly vertical response, which, let us stress, held up well, but which
therefore missed many opportunities, even if there were
counter-examples. In the era of climate change, what role can the
commons play in the necessary shift in our lifestyles and economies? VP:
There is no doubt that digital commons are facilitators of repairability
and reuse. For example, L\'Atelier paysan, a SCIC for self-construction
of agricultural work tools, makes tractor plans available online to
prevent farmers from finding themselves dependent on manufacturers who
provide neither the instructions nor the parts to repair them. In
Lanester \[Morbihan\], near Lorient, the Défis association recovers
obsolete computers from companies, reconditions them and equips them
with free software before offering them to families in precarious
situations. We also see free software communities working to write the
most frugal code possible, in order to limit the energy consumption
linked to digital uses. These initiatives are all catalysts for
developing more ecological digital practices.

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1797

It all started with outrage. In 2011, after attracting 3 million users
in Europe, the free platform Covoiturage.fr -- now Blablacar --
announced that it would become a paid platform. From now on, each
passenger boarding an unknown car in order to share the journey and
costs would have to pay a 20% commission. A handful of rebels rose up
and created the association Covoiturage libre, with its platform of the
same name. In 2018, the structure had nearly 200,000 users, opted for
cooperative status and renamed itself Mobicoop. It was at this time that
Bastien Sibille, now president of the structure, joined the adventure.
For this fervent defender of free software, \"large platforms like Uber
or Airbnb are collaborative but not cooperative: behind a very cool
appearance of renting a couch, there are always investment funds that
charge commissions and sell user data\". Mobicoop, on the other hand,
favors free and democratic governance. For its 600,000 users, getting in
touch for a carpool is free. The cooperative\'s income comes from its
services for local authorities and businesses. It develops customized
carpooling platforms for them and ensures their animation. Its clients
are varied, from the Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes region to the Pays d\'Epinal
via the Andros company. In 3,000 rural communities, Mobicoop has even
institutionalized hitchhiking: green signs decorated with a thumbs-up
indicate the places where aspiring passengers can wait for a driver -
duly registered - to stop. Average waiting time claimed by the
cooperative: six minutes. As a player in digital commons, Mobicoop bases
its activity on free software. Consequently, \"if tomorrow the Greater
Lyon or the Finistère department no longer want to work with us, their
IT specialists will be able to use the computer code of the carpooling
platform themselves,\" continues Bastien Sibille. And the data on the
journeys made will remain their property. With other players, this data
would potentially be commercialized. This is very serious.\" Another
distinctive feature is that Mobicoop is a collective interest
cooperative company (SCIC). Decisions are made between the 1,120
members, including local authorities, financiers, employees, customers,
users, etc. \"The cooperative belongs to all the people who use it, and
they vote according to the principle of \"one person, one vote.\" A
structure like Macif, for example, therefore has the same
decision-making power as a user holding a single share,\" says Bastien
Sibille happily. Three times more Between January and September,
Mobicoop made more than 162,500 carpools possible. That\'s three times
more than during the entire previous year. These figures are far removed
from the 5 million journeys claimed by Blablacar, which recruits its
users through expensive advertising campaigns. But the trend is upwards.
\"The way people travel is in the general interest. By sharing journeys,
Mobicoop provides a response to the precarious mobility of rural
residents, who are facing rising fuel prices,\" notes Bastien Sibille.
He dreams of a partnership with the SNCF to facilitate travel to and
from stations. Another advantage, and not the least, the cooperative
contributes to the fight against global warming: the carpools carried
out through it during the first eight months of this year have prevented
the emission of 1,300 tons of CO2 into the atmosphere. For the president
of the cooperative, it is obvious, \"digital commons offer new ways of
providing public service\".

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1798

Times of crisis reveal initiatives that pave the way for resilience.
During the Covid-19 pandemic, it was volunteer engineers who, in 2020,
developed the CovidTracker information site using open source software,
then the Vite ma dose vaccine tracking application a year later. At the
same time, the network of fab labs, these participatory third places,
responded to calls for help from caregivers by manufacturing thousands
of visors and respirators using plans under Creative Commons license --
a tool that allows creators to let the public, under certain conditions,
copy their works, modify them or use them to do something else. The
emergency has highlighted the relevance of the values of openness,
cooperation and co-organization of digital commons, these resources
shared and accessible online, co-produced and maintained collectively by
communities who themselves define the usage rights. From the Wikipedia
encyclopedia to the OpenStreetMap map database and the free Linux
operating system, the leader in most of the servers that run major web
services, these commons are essential. \"We have a lot to gain from
open-source solutions\", an approach that allows us to \"reduce costs
for society\" and \"strengthen security\", estimated Johannes Hahn, the
Commissioner for Budget and Administration at the European Commission,
in 2021. Especially since open resources can contribute \"significantly
to the challenges of mitigating and adapting to climate change\",
underlines the Agency for Ecological Transition (Ademe). Supporting
activists However, these initiatives remain fragile. Digital commons
often only last thanks to the goodwill of activists who are exhausted.
In recent years, the State has been thinking about how to support them.
The interministerial digital department supports projects of general
interest within its \"citizen initiative accelerator\", such as the
database of food products \"created by all and for all\" Open Food
Facts, or the early detection system for forest fires using artificial
intelligence (AI), from the Pyronear association. \"The State is moving
away from a logic of purchasing and prescription to play the role of
catalyst for initiatives that represent a wealth for more open,
distributed and robust public action\", notes Pierre-Louis Rolle, from
the National Agency for Territorial Cohesion (ANCT). It is to raise
public awareness of these ideas that the ANCT is organizing, this year
in Bordeaux, on October 19 and 20, the sixth edition of the event
Numérique en commun\[s\] of which Le Monde is a partner. The
acceleration of developments in artificial intelligence (AI) and the
desire to preserve European sovereignty and values in this sector are
today renewing interest in digital commons. A call for projects launched
in June by the State aims to \"create digital commons across the entire
generative artificial intelligence chain\", in particular the huge
databases needed to train and improve future AI programs. New economic
models are emerging, combining public service, the private sector and
citizen dynamics. However, everyone must ensure that the shared
governance of these commons is preserved, without any partner seeking to
upset the balance. \"Beware of \'commons washing\' because the term
\'commons\' is fashionable and many structures want to claim it without
there being any real citizen social dynamic behind the projects\", warns
Dorie Bruyas, programmer of the event Numérique en commun\[s\]. It is at
the cost of this vigilance that \"the relevance of the commons\" can
\"help us change our glasses\", according to the expression of digital
social science researcher Valérie Peugeot, and \"show that we can build
society differently\".

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1799

Gmail, Drive, Messenger... free for the user, the services of Gafam
(Google, Amazon, Facebook, Apple and Microsoft) are not without
counterpart. These tech giants suck up personal data, which they value
and market without paying a single cent to their owners. Put off by
these practices, Adrien Luxey-Bitri, 28, and Quentin Dufour, 30, both
holders of a doctorate in computer science, are fighting to offer
replacement solutions. With other enthusiasts, these two "tinkerers"
co-founded the Deuxfleurs association in Rennes in 2020 to provide
citizens with services with functions similar to those of Gafam. Instead
of the WhatsApp messaging application, Deuxfleurs offers Matrix; to
replace Zoom video conferences, they are banking on Jitsi. And for
collaborative work, they dethrone Google Drive with CryptPad. In its
fight against the influence of digital giants, Deuxfleurs is not acting
alone. The association is one of 96 similar structures created in recent
years in France by activists determined to increase technological
services for the public. They are grouped under the banner of the
Collectif des hôtes alternatives, transparents, ouverts, neutres et
solidaires, better known by its acronym, Chatons. This activist
collective took root in 2014 with the deployment of the "Dégooglisons
Internet" initiative, launched by Framasoft. This popular education
association, founded in 2004, fights to ensure that the Web remains
accessible to all and that Internet users' data is not abusively
captured by the giants of the sector. Small agile structures Framasoft
then offers around forty services to citizens: collaborative work tool,
calendar, spreadsheet, etc. A success: these services attract up to
600,000 monthly users. But, very quickly, Framasoft realized that it was
reproducing, on a smaller scale, what it criticized Gafam for: offering
a single interface to hundreds of thousands of Internet users. So, in
2016, it created the Chatons initiative. The idea is to encourage the
emergence of small, independent and agile structures that manage their
own services and users. Coordinator of the collective, Angie Gaudion
explains: \"It\'s our way of \"sharing the cake\", of creating and
promoting citizen initiatives similar to the \"Dégooglisons Internet\"
program, throughout the territory.\" To join the collective and remain
there in the long term, Chatons undertake to respect around one hundred
and fifty criteria. In addition to a necessary online presence, they
must offer services based on free software, i.e. tools that can be used,
copied and modified free of charge by anyone. They must also undertake
to ban all advertising and any exploitation of personal data. The
activists of the collective know it well: you don\'t join the Chatons to
get rich. Moreover, most of the time, they are volunteers. However, they
do not work for free. The use of the services is often paid for.
Different models are applied. At Deuxfleurs, beneficiaries choose the
amount they are willing to pay to access the services offered, even if
the administrators recommend a price of \"between 10 and 15 euros per
year\". Other Chatons have a more traditional approach. This is the case
of Pâquerette, created in 2017 by Dominique Hébert, in the Paris region.
This 65-year-old retiree has opted for an operation close to that of a
company. It is aimed more at organizations than individuals, with rates
starting at 100 euros per year. \"Our association has five part-time
people, so we try to pay ourselves,\" he confides. Generating revenue is
a real challenge for the Chatons, because their reputation is still
slim. \"For now, we are working mainly with people who are already
convinced of the importance of escaping the influence of Gafam,\"
acknowledges Dominique Hébert. This former IT consultant has not lost
hope of being able to persuade more citizens to become \"the driving
forces behind the liberation of digital uses.\"

## ###ARTICLE_START### ID:1800

Put an end to obscure data tables and barbaric names on the back of
products in our supermarkets. This is the mission that Stéphane Gigandet
set himself in 2012. This computer engineer from the Ecole Centrale de
Nantes, who worked at Yahoo! in California, created the culinary blog
portal Recettes de Cuisine. In his fight, he was quickly joined by
Charles Nepote, a data pioneer in France, former program director of a
think tank specializing in digital transformations, and by Pierre
Slamich, a graduate of Sciences Po Paris in finance and strategy.
Outraged by the lack of transparency of brands, the three activists,
armed with a website and a simple digital camera, decided to create
their own database, civic and accessible to all. Their goal: to offer
consumers the possibility of knowing the products they buy and to allow
them to compare them easily. \"It must be remembered that at the time,
the Nutri-score nutritional classification had not yet seen the light of
day, and that the only information available to consumers came from the
marketing speeches of brands,\" Pierre Slamich explains today. Faced
with the opacity of the food industry, hundreds of volunteers from the
free software community are working to find the preservatives and
colorings hidden in the ingredient lists of products sold in
supermarkets. Tartrazine (E102), quinoline yellow (E104) or Ponceau 4R
(E124): these additives suspected of side effects or known to be
dangerous for health soon hold no more secrets for them. \"Initially,
data entry proved laborious,\" says Pierre Slamich. We identified 100,
then 1,000, then 10,000 products, starting with the most popular. Then,
quite quickly, we created an app to scan the barcodes of items. » A
Nutri-score made more visible Available on Android, from 2012, and on
the App Store, a year later, the application was immediately designed in
crowdsourcing, that is to say in participatory collection. \"The
principle is very \"free\": when the citizen scans the barcode of a
product, it is automatically added to the database, the information
obtained benefits everyone\", he adds. The application is free and its
data open. \"We launched the project at the time of President Obama, our
slogan \"Yes, we scan\". That was our philosophy: to give citizens the
possibility to act and no longer suffer.\" In order to make the
composition of products understandable for the general public, the
developers of Open Food Facts are approaching two research units
specialized in nutrition and food. That of the nutritional epidemiology
research team, attached to Inserm and led by Professor Serge Hercberg,
at the origin of the Nutri-score, and that of Professor Carlos Monteiro,
creator of the Nova classification, providing information on the degree
of transformation of the materials at the origin of a product. \"We gave
visibility to these classifications, in particular to Nutri-score, which
was not yet recognized by citizens\", continues Pierre Slamich. With
success. In 2016, France adopted the Nutri-score, soon followed by
Belgium and Spain in 2018. Although its use remains optional in these
countries, more and more brands are adopting it on their packaging.
Having long relied on volunteers, the Open Food Facts association was
structured in 2019, thanks to a multi-year agreement signed with Santé
publique France. \"This is our first historic support. This partnership
with the State has allowed us to work full-time on our project," adds
Pierre Slamich. Another alliance, formed with the interministerial
digital department, provides them with 80,000 euros and helps finance a
full-time position. The team now has eight employees. In addition to
this public support, including Ademe, Open Food Facts benefits from the
help of several foundations (including those of Google and Free) and
donations from citizens. A little over ten years after its creation, the
free database lists more than 2 million products. The application is
consulted by 2.7 million visitors each month and is available in more
than 180 countries. With its free and open data, the project has
attracted imitators: Yuka, Foodvisor, Y\'a quoi dedans and Scan Eat have
all since used Open Food Facts data to launch their own projects. And
Pierre Slamich concludes: \"We are delighted to see so many tools
available to citizens, this is what has made it possible to impose a
public health score on manufacturers. This is our victory.\"
